<<< source: toc-tdm-eng.html >>>

Budget 2015 - Table of Contents

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

Chapter 1 Introduction Economic Action Plan 2015 Supporting the  Manufacturing Sector and Investing in Advanced Research (Chapter 3.1) Encouraging Investment in Canada’s  Manufacturing Sector Supporting World-Class Advanced Research Helping Small Businesses and Entrepreneurs  Create Jobs (Chapter 3.2) Helping Small Businesses Grow and Fostering Entrepreneurship Reducing Red Tape for Businesses and  Enhancing Corporate Governance Training a Highly Skilled Workforce (Chapter 3.3) Training the Workforce of Tomorrow Supporting Canadian Workers Ensuring a Safe and Healthy Workplace Investing in Infrastructure (Chapter 3.4) Growing Trade and Expanding Markets (Chapter 3.5) Fostering Trade Responsible Resource Development Low-Tax Plan to Help Families Make Ends Meet (Chapter 4.1) Helping Families Make Ends Meet Supporting Seniors Protecting Consumers and Enhancing Canada’s  Financial Sector Building Strong Communities (Chapter 4.2) Supporting the Charitable and Non-Profit  Sector Taking Action for Veterans Supporting the Most Vulnerable in Communities Helping Canadians With Disabilities Investing in the Health of Canadians Investing in Aboriginal Communities Assisting International Communities Celebrating Our Heritage Protecting Canada’s Environment Protecting Canadians (Chapter 4.3) Defending Canada Enhancing National Security Protecting the Integrity of Our Borders Strengthening Community Safety Balancing the Budget (Chapter 5)

Chapter 2 - Economic  Developments and Prospects Highlights Introduction Global Economic Developments              and Outlook Europe Japan Emerging Economies United States Financial Market Developments Commodity Prices Canada’s Economic Performance Impacts of Lower Oil Prices on the            Canadian Economy Government Actions Will Support Economic Growth and            Job Creation Canadian Economic Outlook—Private Sector Forecasts Risk Assessment Planning Assumptions

Chapter 3.0 - Creating Jobs and Economic Growth Introduction

Chapter 3.1 - Supporting the Manufacturing  Sector and Investing in Advanced Research Highlights Encouraging Investment in Canada’s Manufacturing Sector Supporting World-Class Advanced Research Introduction Encouraging Investment in Canada’s Manufacturing Sector Tax Support for  Manufacturing Investment Unilateral Tariff Relief to Support Canadian Manufacturers Fostering Automotive Supplier Innovation Developing the Canadian Aerospace Supply Chain Maximizing Economic Benefits From Defence Procurement Supporting World-Class Advanced Research Supporting Research, Infrastructure and Talent Investing in Leading-Edge  Research Infrastructure Strengthening Digital Research Infrastructure Supporting Digital Infrastructure Through  the Canada Foundation for Innovation Supporting Canada’s High-Speed Research Network Supporting Leading-Edge Research Through the  Granting Councils Confirming Canada’s Participation  in the World-Leading Thirty Meter Telescope Investing in Canada’s Premier Strengths  in Physics Supporting Atomic Energy of Canada Limited Renewing Funding for the Council of  Canadian Academies Supporting Business  Innovation Fostering the Growth of Canada’s Space Sector Supporting Commercialization of Space Technologies Extending Canada’s Participation in the  International Space Station Fostering Business-Driven Research  and Development at the National Research Council Internships for the Next Generation of Research and  Development Leaders Strengthening the Delivery of Business  Innovation Programs Strengthening Linkages Between Complementary Programs Fostering International Science and  Technology Partnerships Enhancing Business Use of  Intellectual Property

Chapter 3.2 - Helping Small Businesses and  Entrepreneurs Create Jobs Highlights Helping Small Businesses Grow and Fostering Entrepreneurship Reducing Red Tape for Businesses and Enhancing Corporate  Governance Introduction Helping Small Businesses Grow and Fostering  Entrepreneurship Lowering the EI Premium Rate in 2017 Reducing Taxes for Small Businesses Increasing the Lifetime Capital Gains Exemption to  $1 Million for Owners of Farm and Fishing Businesses Improving Access to Financing for Canadian Small  Businesses Expanding Services of  the Business Development Bank of Canada to Support Canadian Businesses New Export Development Canada Initiatives for Canadian  Small Businesses Helping Innovative Companies Grow and Create Jobs  Through the Venture Capital Action Plan Supporting Young Entrepreneurs Through Futurpreneur  Canada Supporting Women in Business Through the Action  Plan for Women Entrepreneurs Reducing Red Tape for Businesses and Enhancing  Corporate Governance Reducing the Tax Compliance Burden A Quarterly Remitter Category for  New Employers Consulting on the Active Versus  Passive Business Income Rules for the Small Business Deduction Expanding the Use of Business Numbers Streamlining Withholding Requirements for Non-Resident Employers Repeated Failure to Report Income Penalty The Canada Revenue Agency Continues to Cut Red Tape  and Improve Services Modernizing Canada’s Corporate  Governance Framework

Chapter 3.3 - Training a Highly Skilled Workforce Highlights Training the Workforce of Tomorrow Supporting Canadian Workers Ensuring a Safe and Healthy Workplace Introduction Training the Workforce of Tomorrow Supporting  Apprenticeship Training Providing Support to Provinces and Territories to  Harmonize Apprenticeship Training Promoting Blue Seal Certification Fostering Training That  Responds to Employer Needs Expanding Eligibility for Canada Student Grants Making Canada Student Loans Work for Families Enhancing Canada Student Loans Investing in Aboriginal Labour Market Programming Improving Canadians’ Access to Computer Equipment  and Digital Skills Supporting Canadian Workers Removing Disincentives to Work Improving Take-up of the Working Income Tax Benefit Enhancing Labour Market Information Ensuring Training Reflects Labour Market Needs Removing Financial Barriers to Foreign Credential  Recognition Labour Market Integration of New Canadians Reforming the Temporary Foreign Worker Program Ensuring a Safe and Healthy Workplace Modernizing the Canada  Labour Code Strengthening Compliance With the Canada Labour Code Modernizing the Government  Employees Compensation Act Ensuring a Healthier and More Productive Public  Service

Chapter 3.4 - Investing in Infrastructure Highlights Investing in Infrastructure Investing in  Infrastructure Investments Are Making a Difference A  New Building Canada Plan A Decade of Record Funding for Provinces, Territories  and Municipalities Shovels in the Ground—Implementing the New Building  Canada Fund The  Federal Gas Tax Fund—Dedicated Funding for Municipalities Continuing to Advance the  New Building Canada Plan Increasing Borrowing Limits for the Northwest  Territories and Nunavut Supporting Major Public Transit Projects Canada 150 Community Infrastructure Program Continuing to Build and Renew Federal Infrastructure Renewing Infrastructure Across the Country Simplifying Federal Pension Fund Investment  in Canada

Chapter 3.5 - Growing Trade and Expanding  Markets Highlights Fostering Trade Responsible Resource Development Introduction Fostering Trade Export Market Development Program Enhancing the Trade Commissioner Service Securing Agriculture Market Access Expanding the AgriMarketing Program Supporting the Canadian  Sealing Industry Promoting Canada as a  Global Maritime Centre Promoting Canadian Tourism Ensuring an Effective Trade Remedy System Canada-U.S. Beyond  the Border Action Plan and Regulatory  Cooperation Council Action Plan Reducing Barriers to Internal Trade Responsible Resource Development Supporting the Creation of an LNG Industry in Canada Supporting Junior Mineral Exploration Facilitating Responsible Resource Development Major Projects Management Office Initiative Supporting  Consultations and Public Engagement in Federal Environmental Assessment  Processes Contributing to the  Safety of Energy Transportation Infrastructure Extending Natural Gas  Export Licences Safe and Secure Shipping Supporting Jobs in Mining  Through Geoscience Investments Unlocking Rare Earth  Elements and Chromite Production in Canada Supporting Forest  Sector Innovation and Marketing

Chapter 4.0: Prosperous Families and Strong,  Secure Communities Introduction

Chapter 4.1: Low-Tax Plan to Help Families  Make Ends Meet Highlights Helping Families Make Ends Meet Supporting Seniors Protecting Consumers and Enhancing Canada's  Financial Sector Introduction Helping Families Make Ends Meet Tax Relief and Enhanced Benefits for Canadian  Families and Individuals The Impact of the Government's Low-Tax    Plan Increasing the  Tax-Free Savings Account Annual Contribution Limit The TFSA and Seniors Lowering the EI Premium Rate in 2017 Extending Compassionate Care Benefits Supporting Seniors Reducing the Minimum Withdrawal Factors for  Registered Retirement Income Funds A Home Accessibility Tax Credit for Seniors  and Persons With Disabilities Protecting Consumers and Enhancing Canada's  Financial Sector Consumer Protection Framework for Banks Investigating Cross-Border Price Discrimination Expanding the Voluntary Mortgage Prepayment  Disclosure Commitment Financial Literacy Strategy Taxpayer Protection and Bank Recapitalization Regime Reinforcing  the Housing Finance Framework Cooperative  Capital Markets Regulatory System Financial  Sector Oversight National  Counterfeit Enforcement Strategy Credit Unions Retail Payment Systems Federal Pension Framework Renminbi Hub

Chapter 4.2 - Strong  Communities Highlights Supporting the Charitable and Non-Profit Sector Taking Action for Veterans Supporting the Most Vulnerable in Communities Helping Canadians With Disabilities Investing in the Health of Canadians Investing in Aboriginal Communities Assisting International Communities Celebrating Our Heritage Protecting Canada’s Environment Introduction Supporting the Charitable and Non-Profit Sector Supporting  the Charitable Sector Exempting Donations Involving Private Shares and  Real Estate From Capital Gains Tax Providing Charities With More  Flexibility to Diversify Their Investments Social Finance Accelerator Initiative Taking Action for  Veterans Enhancing the New Veterans Charter Improving Services to Veterans Supporting the Most  Vulnerable in Communities Cooperative and Non-Profit Social Housing Federal Support for Affordable Housing Child Advocacy Centres Helping Canadians With Disabilities Taking Action on Autism Spectrum Disorder Registered Disability Savings  Plans—Legal Representation Improving Access to Print Materials for the  Visually Impaired Investing in the Health of Canadians Supporting Health Care in Canada Health System Innovation: Canadian Foundation for  Healthcare Improvement Mental Health Commission of Canada Improving Seniors’ Health Through  Innovation Investing in Aboriginal Communities First Nations Land Management Improving First Nations Education Indspire Sustained Support for Mental Health Services in First Nations  Communities Surveys on Aboriginal People Assisting International Communities Ensuring That Canadians Have Access to Safe,  Reliable and Lower-Cost Remittance Services Grand Challenges Canada The Development Finance Initiative Celebrating Our Heritage Canada 150 Renewal and Enhancement of Canada’s Honours System Supporting Canada’s Olympic and Paralympic Athletes Promoting Arts and Culture at Toronto’s  Harbourfront Centre Protection of Sound Recordings and Performances Protecting Canada’s Environment National Protected Areas Protecting Species at Risk Protecting Environmentally Sensitive Areas Pacific Salmon Foundation Recreational Fisheries Conservation Partnerships  Program Maintaining Arctic Meteorological and Navigational  Services Addressing Toxic Chemicals Cleaning up Federal Contaminated Sites

Chapter 4.3 - Protecting Canadians Highlights Defending Canada Enhancing National Security Protecting the Integrity of Our Borders Strengthening  Community Safety Introduction Defending Canada Increasing National Defence Funding Supporting the Deployment of the Canadian Armed  Forces to Combat ISIL Supporting Our Allies Through Military Training Increasing Security at Canadian Armed Forces Bases Enhancing National Security Countering Terrorism Enhancing the Review of National Security Agencies Enhancing the Security of Government of Canada  Networks and Cyber Systems Protecting Vital Cyber Systems Improving Security on Parliament Hill Improving  Canada’s Economic Sanctions Protecting the Privacy of Personal Information Protecting the Integrity of Our Borders Facilitating Legitimate Travel to Canada Strengthening Community Safety Enhancing Court Security Improving Public Safety Communications Supporting the Ottawa Police Service Memorial for Three Moncton Royal Canadian Mounted  Police Officers Enhancing the Motor  Vehicle Safety Act

Chapter 5.0 - Balancing  the Budget Highlights

Chapter 5.1 - Balancing  the Budget and Reducing the Debt Burden Balancing the Budget Balanced Budget Legislation Debt Reduction Modernizing Government Improving the Integrity of Federal Procurement Strengthening Tax Compliance Efforts to Combat the Underground Economy Combatting International Tax Evasion and Aggressive  Tax Avoidance Combatting Tax Avoidance by the Largest and Most  Complex Business Entities Improving the Fairness and Integrity of the Tax System

Chapter 5.2 - Fiscal Outlook Fiscal Outlook Before the Measures                       Announced in Economic Action Plan 2015 Fiscal Impact of the Measures in Economic Action  Plan 2015 Summary  Statement of Transactions Outlook for Budgetary Revenues Outlook for Program Expenses Financial Source/Requirement Risks to the Fiscal Projections Sensitivity of the Budgetary Balance to Economic  Shocks

Annex 1 - Maintaining Fiscal Balance  in the Federation

Annex 2 - International Debt Comparisons

Annex 3 - Supporting  a Strong Manufacturing Sector

Annex 4 - Debt Management Strategy for 2015–16

Annex 5 - Tax Measures: Supplementary Information and Notices of Ways and Means Motions

Annex 5.1 - Tax Measures: Supplementary  Information

Annex 5.2 - Tax Measures: Notices of Ways and Means Motions



<<< source: ch1-eng.html >>>

Chapter 1 - Introduction

The Government is fulfilling its promise to balance the budget  in 2015, pursuant to its long-standing commitment to responsible fiscal  management. Economic  Action Plan 2015 will see the budget balanced and Canadians can rest assured  that Canada’s fiscal house is in order.

Under the Government’s Economic Action Plan, the deficit has  been reduced from $55.6 billion at the height of the global economic and  financial crisis to a projected surplus of $1.4 billion for 2015–16 (Chart  1.1).

Canada’s Economic Action Plan has been underpinned by  prudent fiscal management and the Government’s low-tax plan for families and  businesses. Since 2006, the Government’s priorities have been to create well-paying  and secure jobs for Canadians, lower taxes for Canadian families and  businesses, and balance the budget.

This Government has lowered taxes every year since coming  into office. In fact, since 2006 the Government has introduced over 180 tax  relief measures. The overall federal tax burden is now at its lowest level in  more than 50 years.

Canadian families and individuals have benefitted from  significant tax reductions that have given them the flexibility to make the choices  that are right for them. Canadians at all income levels are benefitting from  the tax relief introduced by the Government, with low- and middle-income  Canadians receiving proportionally greater relief (Chart 1.2).

Tax relief measures introduced since 2006, in combination  with benefit increases, are leaving more money in the pockets of all  Canadians:

Canadian families and individuals will receive  $37 billion in tax relief and increased benefits in 2015–16 as a result of  actions taken since 2006.

A typical two-earner family of four will receive tax relief  and increased benefits of up to $6,600 in 2015, as a result of the Family Tax Cut, the Universal Child  Care Benefit, the Goods and Services Tax (GST) rate reduction, the introduction  of new credits, such as the Children’s Fitness Tax Credit, and broad-based  income tax relief including the reduction in the lowest personal income tax  rate (Chart 1.3).

Henry    and Cathy are a couple with two children, Grace and Elizabeth. Henry earns    $84,000 and Cathy earns $36,000. As a result of actions taken by the    Government since 2006, their family will receive $6,640 in tax relief and    enhanced benefits in 2015, allowing Henry and Cathy to invest their    hard-earned money where they see fit.                           As    shown below, this tax relief and these enhanced benefits include:

$3,293 in income tax relief, of which $1,865 is due to measures    announced in the 2014 Family Package;

$2,329 in enhanced benefits, including $1,224 as a result of the    enhanced Universal Child Care Benefit announced in the 2014 Family Package;    and

$1,018 from the Government’s    reduction of the GST rate from 7 per cent to 5 per cent.

The Government’s low-tax plan is also giving businesses  strong incentives to invest in Canada. This helps the economy grow, spurs job  creation and raises Canada’s standard of living. Actions taken by the  Government since 2006, including those proposed in Economic Action Plan 2015,  will reduce taxes for job-creating businesses by $14.7 billion in 2015–16.  Canada now has the lowest overall tax rate on new business investment in the Group  of Seven (G-7) (Chart 1.4).

Canada’s Economic Action Plan is working. Canada  continues to move forward in the face of a fragile external environment and  profound global economic uncertainty. Canada has achieved one of the best economic  performances among G-7 countries over the recovery. Indeed, real gross  domestic product (GDP) has increased more in Canada than in any other G-7  country since the end of the recession (Chart 1.5).

Reflecting this solid performance, over 1.2 million more  Canadians are working now than at the end of the recession in June 2009—one of  the strongest job creation records in the G-7 over this period. The majority of  these net new jobs have been full-time positions in high-wage, private-sector  industries.

The  Government’s prudent fiscal plan has carefully steered Canada to balanced  budgets in the face of headwinds, such as the sharp decline in crude oil prices—the third-largest  decline in the last three decades. All the while, the Government has remained  committed to putting money back in the pockets of hard-working Canadian  families and businesses.

Our Government is fulfilling its promise    to balance the federal budget. We are now in a position to fulfill    our promise to help Canadian families balance theirs.

Actions taken by the Government over the past year will  help further support economic growth and the creation of jobs in Canada. On a  cash basis, these include:

Support for Canadian families through the new  Family Tax Cut and Universal Child Care Benefit enhancements totalling $7.8  billion in 2015–16 and over $4.5 billion ongoing.

Support for small businesses through the Small  Business Job Credit and Employment Insurance (EI) premium freezes for three  years, followed by a committed reduction in EI premiums to a seven-year  break-even rate in 2017.

$5.8 billion in new investments that will  continue to build and renew federal infrastructure across the country, with the  majority of this support being delivered within three years.

These measures, together with those announced in Economic  Action Plan 2015, total almost $10 billion in 2015–16, or 0.5 per cent of GDP,  and average $8.5 billion per year thereafter, on a cash basis  (Chart 1.6). This will provide significant support to the Canadian economy  starting in the second quarter of 2015.

Sound and sustainable public  finances are paramount to ensuring ongoing economic growth and job creation  over the longer term. Balanced budgets ensure low taxes, support the  sustainability of the services and programs Canadians depend on, and inspire  confidence in investors and consumers.

In this challenging environment, it is    vital that the federal government stay focused on balancing its budget…

Prior to the global recession, the Government reduced  Canada’s debt by more than $37 billion and the federal debt-to-GDP ratio to  28.2 per cent. As a result, Canada was well positioned to weather the storm as  the global economy fell into recession. Canada was able to emerge from the  recession faster and stronger than virtually any other major advanced economy.

In successive budgets, beginning with Budget 2010, and as  the economy recovered, the Government wound down fiscal stimulus and controlled  spending to engineer a return to balanced budgets.

Having balanced the budget, the set-aside for contingencies  will continue to protect the fiscal outlook from global economic uncertainty,  and will be used to reduce the level of federal debt, if it is not required.

At the G-20 Leaders’ Summit in 2013, Prime Minister Stephen  Harper announced Canada’s commitment to achieve a federal debt-to-GDP ratio of  25 per cent by 2021. In the 2013 Speech from the Throne, the Government  committed to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio to pre-recession levels by 2017. The  Government remains on target to meet both commitments.

The Government’s commitment to balanced budgets has made  Canada a recognized leader for fiscal stewardship on the world economic stage. Canada’s total government net  debt-to-GDP ratio remains the lowest of any G-7 country and among the lowest of  the advanced G-20 countries (Chart 1.7).

Reducing Canada’s debt burden is also a question of intergenerational  fairness—it would simply not be fair to saddle our children and grandchildren  with inevitable tax hikes to pay for the expenses we could not settle ourselves.

Balancing the budget takes hard work and tough choices. A  balanced budget:

Ensures taxpayer dollars are used to support  important social                         services—such as health care—rather than paying interest costs.

Preserves Canada’s low-tax plan and allows for  further tax reductions, fostering growth and the creation of jobs for the  benefit of all Canadians.

Helps to instill confidence in consumers and  investors, whose dollars spur economic growth and job creation.

Strengthens the country’s ability to respond to  longer-term challenges, such as population aging, and unexpected  global economic shocks.

Signals that public services are sustainable,  ensuring fairness for future generations by avoiding future tax increases or  reductions in services.

To secure recent gains, the Government is proposing to  enshrine in law its prudent approach to fiscal planning by introducing balanced  budget legislation. This proposed legislation confirms the Government’s ongoing  commitment to responsibly managing taxpayers’ money.

Economic Action Plan 2015

Going forward, global economic uncertainty dictates that for  Canada to become an even safer, more confident and more prosperous country, the  Government must continue to take responsible and deliberate steps to create  jobs, foster economic growth and maintain its commitment to fiscal  responsibility.

Canada’s Economic Action Plan is working, but the job is not  done and there are new challenges on the horizon. The Government must stay the  course to protect the economic interests of Canadians and the security of  Canada.

Economic Action Plan 2015 will continue to implement  measures that support what matters to Canadians:

Supporting  jobs and growth by maintaining the right economic environment to allow  job-creating businesses to thrive and reach new markets with their products,  proposing new investments in public infrastructure, and training a highly  skilled workforce that is responsive to the evolving needs of employers.

Helping  families and communities prosper by continuing to provide tax relief for  Canadian families and individuals, enhancing opportunities for all Canadians,  and celebrating Canada’s cultural and natural heritage.

Ensuring  the security of Canadians by continuing to support the Canadian Armed  Forces and protecting Canadians from the threat of terrorism at home and  abroad.

Maintaining focus on these priorities is the best way to  ensure that Canada’s future is secure and prosperous, with a healthy economy  fuelled by low taxes and sustainable public finances.

Supporting the  Manufacturing Sector and Investing in Advanced Research (Chapter 3.1)

Since 2006, the Government has taken action to reduce taxes  to promote investment in Canada, and leverage the collective efforts of post-secondary  institutions, industry, and government to build a robust research sector.  Economic Action Plan 2015 builds on this foundation by:

Encouraging Investment in Canada’s  Manufacturing Sector

Maintaining a low tax burden on businesses to  encourage investment in Canada.

Providing manufacturers a 10-year tax incentive to  boost productivity-enhancing investment.

Providing up to $100 million over  five years, starting in 2015–16, for a new Automotive Supplier  Innovation Program.

Developing a national aerospace supplier  development initiative.

Providing $2.5 million per year, starting in  2016–17, to increase the analytical capacity needed to support the Defence  Procurement Strategy.

Supporting World-Class Advanced Research

Providing an additional $1.33 billion over six  years, starting in 2017–18, to the Canada Foundation for Innovation to support  advanced research infrastructure at universities, colleges and research  hospitals.

Providing $105 million over five years, starting  in 2015–16, to CANARIE, Canada’s world-class high-speed research and  education network.

Dedicating an additional $46 million per year to  the granting councils, starting in 2016–17.

Providing up to $243.5 million to secure  Canada’s participation in the Thirty Meter Telescope and related domestic work  on leading-edge components.

Providing an additional $30 million over four  years, starting in 2016–17, to support cutting-edge research and  technology development in Canada’s satellite communications sector.

Extending Canada’s participation in the International  Space Station mission to 2024.

Dedicating $119.2 million over two years,  starting in 2015–16, to the National Research Council’s industry-partnered  research and development activities.

Providing $56.4 million over four years,  starting in 2016–17, to Mitacs in support of graduate-level industrial research  and development internships.

Helping Small Businesses and Entrepreneurs  Create Jobs (Chapter 3.2)

This Government recognizes the vital role that small  businesses play in creating jobs and generating economic growth. Since 2006,  the Government has taken significant action to support job-creating businesses  by lowering taxes, cutting red tape, and encouraging entrepreneurship. Economic  Action Plan 2015 builds on this foundation by:

Helping Small Businesses Grow and Fostering Entrepreneurship

Reducing the small business tax rate from 11 per  cent to 9 per cent by 2019.

Increasing the Lifetime Capital Gains Exemption  to $1 million for owners of farm and fishing businesses.

Increasing access to venture capital financing  to help innovative, high-growth companies grow and create jobs.

Providing $14 million over two years to  Futurpreneur Canada in support of young entrepreneurs.

Supporting the Action Plan for Women  Entrepreneurs to help women business owners succeed.

Reducing Red Tape for Businesses and  Enhancing Corporate Governance

Reducing the frequency of remittances for the  smallest new employers.

Launching the planning and preparation required  for federal adoption of the Business Number as a Common Business Identifier.

Training a Highly Skilled Workforce (Chapter 3.3)

Since  2006, the Government has acted to ensure the development of a skilled, mobile  and productive workforce. Despite significant investment, some challenges  remain. Many Canadians are still out of work or underutilized at a time when there  are skills and labour market shortages in certain sectors and regions. To this  end, Economic Action Plan 2015 proposes additional concrete actions that  respond to current labour market challenges and meet longer-term labour market  needs, including:

Training the Workforce of Tomorrow

Facilitating the harmonization of apprenticeship  training and certification requirements in targeted Red Seal trades.

Providing $1 million over five years to promote  the adoption of the Blue Seal Certification program across Canada.

Making a one-time investment of $65 million  to business and industry associations to allow them to work with willing  post-secondary institutions to better align curricula with the needs of  employers.

Expanding eligibility for the Low- and  Middle-Income Canada Student Grants to short duration programs.

Making the Canada Student Loans Program work for  families by reducing the expected parental contribution.

Eliminating in-study student income from the  Canada Student Loans Program needs assessment process.

Investing $248.5 million over five years in  Aboriginal labour market programming.

Supporting Canadian Workers

Investing $53.8 million over two years to extend  the current Employment Insurance Working While on Claim pilot project to August  2016.

Enhancing labour market information, including  the launch of a new one-stop national labour market information portal.

Pursuing negotiations with provinces and  territories on the $1.95-billion-per-year Labour Market Development Agreements  to reorient training towards labour market demand.

Providing $35 million over five years to make  permanent the Foreign Credential Recognition Loans pilot project.

Ensuring a Safe and Healthy Workplace

Strengthening Canada Labour Code protections for  all employees and interns under federal jurisdiction.

Providing $4.8 million over five years  to increase compliance with the health and safety provisions of the Canada Labour Code .

The Government will make every effort to reach  agreement with bargaining agents within a reasonable timeframe on necessary  reforms to disability and sick leave management.

Investing in Infrastructure (Chapter 3.4)

Our quality of  life and ability to compete on the global stage depend on the performance and  quality of our public infrastructure. In Economic Action Plan 2015, this  Government continues to make unprecedented long-term investments to ensure that  Canadians continue to benefit from world-class infrastructure across the  country by:

Providing an additional $750 million over two years,  starting in 2017–18, and $1 billion per year ongoing thereafter for a  new and innovative Public Transit Fund.

Continuing to provide $5.35 billion per year on  average for provincial, territorial and municipal infrastructure under the New  Building Canada Plan.

Creating a new dedicated infrastructure fund to  support the renovation, expansion and improvement of existing community  infrastructure in all regions of the country as part of the Canada 150  celebrations.

Continuing to build and renew federal  infrastructure and on-reserve schools, including through $5.8 billion in  investments over six years.

Growing Trade and Expanding Markets (Chapter 3.5)

International trade and investment are vital to the  continued growth of the Canadian economy and contribute to the prosperity of  people and businesses across Canada, including in the natural resources sector.  Since 2006, the Government has worked tirelessly to ensure that Canadian  exporters and investors have access to foreign markets and preferential terms  of trade and investment with other nations, and that Canada responsibly  develops its natural resources for the benefit of all Canadians. Economic  Action Plan builds on this track record by:

Fostering Trade

Providing $50 million over five years for a  program to share the cost of exploring new export opportunities with small and  medium-sized enterprises.

Providing $42 million over five years to  expand the footprint and resources of the Trade Commissioner Service.

Investing $18.1 million over two years,  starting in 2016–17, to promote trade opportunities for the agriculture and  agri-food sector.

Providing an additional $12 million over  two years, starting in 2016–17, to market Canadian agricultural and agri-food  products around the world.

Allocating $5.7 million over  five years, starting in 2015–16, to help secure new market access for  Canadian seal products.

Providing $3 million over three years, starting  in 2015–16, for the International Maritime Centre to attract foreign  shipping companies to establish their headquarters in Vancouver.

Supporting a new tourism marketing campaign in  the United States.

Ensuring that Canada’s trade remedy system  operates in an effective, accessible and transparent manner.

Responsible Resource Development

Providing accelerated capital cost allowance  treatment for assets used in facilities that liquefy natural gas.

Extending the Mineral Exploration Tax Credit  until March 31, 2016.

Allocating $135 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, to the Major Projects Management Office  Initiative.

Providing $34 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, for consultations related to projects assessed under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.

Dedicating $80 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, to the National Energy Board for safety and environmental  protection and greater engagement with Canadians.

Providing $30.8 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, for measures to enhance the safety of marine  transportation.

Allocating $22 million over  five years, starting in 2015–16, to renew the Targeted Geoscience  Initiative.

Dedicating $23 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, to stimulate the technological innovation needed to  separate and develop rare earth elements and chromite.

Continuing to support the transformation of the  forest sector by providing $86 million over two years, starting in  2016–17, to extend the Forest Innovation Program and the Expanding Market  Opportunities Program.

Low-Tax Plan to Help Families Make Ends Meet (Chapter 4.1)

Since 2006, the Government has introduced several measures  to make life more affordable for Canadian families and individuals, while  recognizing that they are better placed than governments to determine their own  spending priorities. Economic Action Plan 2015 builds on the Government’s  record of support for families and individuals by keeping taxes low and  introducing new measures to help families make ends meet, support seniors, and  protect consumers, such as:

Helping Families Make Ends Meet

Increasing the Tax-Free Savings Account annual  contribution limit to $10,000.

Reaffirming the Government’s commitment to reduce  EI premiums for over 16 million Canadians in 2017.

Extending Employment Insurance Compassionate  Care Benefits from six weeks to six months to better support Canadians  caring for gravely ill family members.

Supporting Seniors

Reducing the minimum withdrawal factors for Registered  Retirement Income Funds to permit seniors to preserve more of their  retirement savings.

Introducing a new Home Accessibility Tax Credit  for seniors and persons with disabilities to help with the costs of ensuring  their homes remain safe, secure and accessible.

Protecting Consumers and Enhancing Canada’s  Financial Sector

Delivering a new and exclusive financial consumer  protection framework for federally regulated banks.

Expanding the voluntary mortgage prepayment  disclosure commitment to non-federally regulated mortgage lenders.

Launching a National Strategy to support  improved financial literacy.

Building Strong Communities (Chapter 4.2)

Since 2006, the Government has fostered opportunities to  work, live, and prosper in safe and vibrant communities. In addition, the  Government’s continued support for our natural and cultural heritage helps  build stronger communities by bringing people together through shared artistic  and cultural experiences and promoting a safe and clean environment. Economic  Action Plan 2015 advances the Government’s ongoing commitment by:

Supporting the Charitable and Non-Profit  Sector

Exempting donations involving private shares and  real estate from capital gains tax.

Providing charities with more flexibility to  diversify their investments.

Taking Action for Veterans

Introducing a new Retirement Income Security  Benefit to provide additional financial security after the age of 65 for  moderately to severely disabled veterans.

Expanding access to the Permanent Impairment  Allowance to help compensate disabled veterans for the loss of career opportunities  associated with their disabilities.

Modifying the Earnings Loss Benefit to ensure  that part-time Reserve Force veterans have access to the same level of income  support as Regular and full-time Reserve Force veterans.

Creating a new tax-free Family Caregiver Relief  Benefit to recognize the vital contributions of informal caregivers to the  health and well-being of veterans.

Increasing the level of individualized care to  veterans requiring regular support by improving the ratio of veterans to case  managers.

Supporting the Most Vulnerable in Communities

Providing $150 million over four years, starting  in 2016–17, to allow cooperative and non-profit social housing providers to  prepay long-term, non-renewable mortgages held with Canada Mortgage and Housing  Corporation without penalty.

Enhancing support for Child Advocacy Centres  across Canada.

Helping Canadians With Disabilities

Introducing a new Home Accessibility Tax Credit  for persons with disabilities and seniors to help with the costs of  ensuring their homes remain safe, secure and accessible.

Allocating $2.0 million in 2015–16 to support  stakeholder consultations on a Canadian Autism Partnership.

Extending  the temporary measure that allows a qualifying family member to become  the plan holder of a Registered Disability Savings Plan.

Introducing amendments to the Copyright Act that will enable Canada to  implement and accede to the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published  Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired or Otherwise Print Disabled.

Investing in the Health of Canadians

Increasing transfers for health care by a  projected $27 billion over the next five years.

Providing $14 million over two years for the  Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement to help identify efficiencies in  the health system.

Renewing the mandate of the Mental Health  Commission of Canada for another 10 years, beginning in 2017–18.

Providing up to $42 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, to help improve seniors’ health through innovation by  establishing the Canadian Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation.

Investing in Aboriginal Communities

Investing $30.3 million over five years  for the expansion of the First Nations Land Management Regime.

Providing $200 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, to improve First Nations education.

Providing $12 million over three years  to Indspire to provide post-secondary scholarships and bursaries for First  Nations and Inuit students.

Assisting International Communities

Allocating $6 million over five years, starting  in 2015–16, to introduce measures that will help ensure Canadians have access  to safe, reliable and lower-cost remittance services.

Investing $22.8 million in 2016–17 for Grand  Challenges Canada to continue its promising work towards solving global health  challenges through innovation.

Establishing the Development Finance Initiative  to support effective international development by providing financing,  technical assistance and business advisory services to firms operating in  developing countries.

Celebrating Our Heritage

Supporting activities and events to celebrate  Canada’s 150th anniversary in 2017, with $210 million over four  years, starting in 2015–16.

Providing $13.4 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, and $2.8 million ongoing to support and modernize the  Canadian Honours System.

Investing up to $20 million over four years,  beginning in 2016–17, to support the next generation of Canadian Olympic and  Paralympic athletes.

Providing $25 million over five years, beginning  in 2016–17, to renew the Harbourfront Centre Funding Program.

Proposing changes to the Copyright Act to extend the term of protection of sound  recordings and performances.

Protecting Canada’s Environment

Continuing to support, with $75 million  over three years, starting in 2015–16, the implementation of the Species  at Risk Act.

Providing $2.0 million in 2015–16 to the  Pacific Salmon Foundation to support the Salish Sea Marine Survival  Project.

Extending the Recreational Fisheries  Conservation Program by providing $10 million per year for three years, starting  in 2016–17.

Dedicating $34 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, to continue to support meteorological and navigational  warning services in the Arctic.

Renewing the Chemicals Management Plan, with  $491.8 million over five years, starting in 2016–17.

Renewing support for the Federal Contaminated  Sites Action Plan with $99.6 million over four years ($1.35 billion  on a cash basis), starting in 2016–17.

Protecting Canadians (Chapter 4.3)

The  Government’s foremost responsibility is to ensure the safety and security of  Canadians and defend our sovereignty. Supporting Canadian men and women in  uniform is a top priority of the Government. Economic Action Plan 2015  introduces new measures to strengthen national security and ensure Canadians feel safe and secure in their  homes, online, and in their communities, such as:

Defending Canada

Strengthening the Canadian Armed Forces by  providing $11.8 billion over 10 years through an increase to the annual  escalator for National Defence’s budget to 3 per cent, starting in  2017–18.

Providing up to $360.3 million in 2015–16 for  the Canadian Armed Forces to extend its mission to counter the Islamic State of  Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).

Providing $7.1 million in 2015–16 for the  Canadian Armed Forces to deliver training assistance to the Ukrainian Security  Forces.

Providing $23 million over four years on a cash  basis, starting in 2015–16, to upgrade the physical security of Canadian  Armed Forces bases.

Enhancing National Security

Investing $292.6 million over five years in  intelligence and law enforcement agencies for additional investigative  resources to counter terrorism.

Doubling the budget of the Security Intelligence  Review Committee by providing $12.5 million over five years, starting in  2015–16, and $2.5 million ongoing thereafter to enhance its review of the  Canadian Security Intelligence Service.

Providing $58 million over five years, starting  in 2015–16, to further protect the Government of Canada’s essential cyber  systems and critical infrastructure against cyber attacks.

Investing $36.4 million over five years  to support the operators of Canada’s vital cyber systems in addressing cyber  security threats, as required by new legislation.

Providing $60.4 million over three years on a  cash basis to support an enhanced security model on Parliament Hill.

Protecting the Integrity of Our Borders

Providing $15.7 million over five years to expand  eligibility for the Electronic Travel Authorization to low-risk travellers from  Brazil, Bulgaria, Mexico and Romania.

Strengthening Community Safety

Investing $27 million over five years, starting  in 2015–16, to enhance security measures at Canada’s federal courts and  registry offices and the Supreme Court of Canada.

Providing $10 million over five years to  the City of Ottawa to support policing services in the Nation’s Capital.

Providing $3 million over two years, starting in  2016–17, to take initial steps to establish a Public Safety Broadband Network,  a high-speed mobile network dedicated to emergency management.

Supporting a memorial for the three Royal  Canadian Mounted Police officers killed in Moncton in June 2014.

Balancing the Budget (Chapter 5)

The  Government is fulfilling its promise to balance the federal budget in 2015. The  Government will return to balanced budgets while maintaining the lowest federal  tax burden on Canadians in over half a century. Economic Action Plan 2015  introduces new efforts to build on our sound public finances and further  modernize government operations.

The Government is fulfilling its promise to  balance the budget in 2015.

The deficit has been reduced from $55.6 billion  at the height of the global economic and financial crisis to a projected  surplus of $1.4 billion in 2015–16.

The federal debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product)  ratio is expected to fall to 27.9 per cent in 2017–18, below its  pre-recession low, putting the Government on track to meeting its target of  25 per cent of GDP by 2021.

Canada’s total government net debt burden is the  lowest of any Group of Seven (G-7) country and among the lowest of the  advanced G-20 countries.

The Government will introduce balanced budget  legislation to enshrine in law its prudent approach to fiscal planning.

To support debt reduction, the Government is  planning on dedicating the amounts set aside for contingencies, if not  required, to reduce the federal debt.

To ensure that the Government continues to do  business with ethical suppliers in Canada and abroad, a new government-wide  procurement integrity framework will be introduced.

The Government is also proposing new measures as part of its  ongoing effort to strengthen tax compliance, and improve the fairness and  integrity of the tax system, to ensure everyone pays their fair share.



<<< source: ch2-eng.html >>>

Chapter 2 - Economic  Developments and Prospects

Highlights

The              Canadian economy has experienced one of the best performances among the Group              of Seven (G-7) countries over the recovery.

Over 1.2              million more Canadians are working now than at the end of the recession, one of              the strongest job performances among G-7 countries over this period.

Since              mid-2014, weak global growth, combined with continued steady increases in oil              supply, has led to significant declines in world crude oil prices.

This is              affecting Canada, which is a producer and net exporter              of crude oil.

However,              the Canadian economy is resilient: real gross domestic product (GDP) is              expected to grow at a pace of about 2 per cent in both 2015 and 2016.

Moreover,              actions taken by the Government in the fall of 2014 and in Economic Action Plan              2015 will provide almost $10 billion of support to the Canadian economy this              fiscal year, starting in the second quarter of 2015.

Risks to              the Canadian economic outlook remain largely external, stemming from the              uncertainty surrounding both the future path of oil prices and              global growth.

Notes: This chapter incorporates data available up to and including            April 17, 2015, unless otherwise indicated. All rates are reported at annual            rates unless otherwise noted.

Introduction

The Canadian economy continues to grow, in the context of a            global recovery that remains fragile. The global economy continued to expand at            a modest pace in 2014, reflecting relatively weak growth in the euro area and            Japan and moderating growth in China. The U.S. remains a bright spot in the            global economy, showing encouraging signs of stronger momentum.

Crude oil prices have declined sharply since mid-2014,            largely reflecting increased supply. While this will be generally positive for            global growth, it is expected to be largely offset by ongoing underlying            weakness in economic momentum. As a result, global economic growth is expected            to remain modest again in 2015.

For Canada, as a            producer and net exporter of crude oil, lower oil prices have led to a            significant downward revision to the outlook for economy-wide prices and            therefore, nominal GDP. Despite the sharply lower oil prices, economic growth            is expected to be resilient, with real GDP expected to grow by 2.0 per cent in            2015 and 2.2 per cent in 2016.

This chapter reviews major global and Canadian economic            developments over the past year, presents the March 2015 average private sector            economic forecast that forms the basis for the fiscal projections presented in            Economic Action Plan 2015, and discusses the risks and uncertainties surrounding            this economic forecast.

Global Economic Developments and Outlook

The global economy expanded at a modest rate in 2014. This            softness reflected very modest growth in the euro area, a continuing downshift            in Chinese growth, and either contraction or stagnation for much of the year in            Japan, Russia and Brazil. The U.S. economy, however, has shown signs of            strengthening, which is an encouraging sign for Canada, as the United States is            Canada's largest export market.

In the context            of ongoing modest global growth, a key development has been the decline in            crude oil prices of about 50 per cent since mid-2014. As most countries are net            importers of oil, this should support global growth in 2015 through lower            energy costs and hence real income gains for households and firms. However,            underlying economic weakness is expected to persist in a number of economies,            leading to only a modest expected pickup in global growth in            2015 (Chart 2.1).

Europe

Despite an expected improvement            in its near-term outlook, the euro area continues to face risks of stagnation            and prolonged low inflation. Following a year-and-a-half-long recession that            ended in mid-2013, economic growth turned positive but remained modest, at just            0.9 per cent in 2014 (Chart 2.2). Inflation continued to slow throughout            last year and the most recent data showed a fourth consecutive monthly fall in            consumer prices in March 2015. Further, while core inflation remains positive,            it has also drifted well below 1 per cent, raising the risk of deflation.

In response to the weak economic recovery and low and declining inflation, the            European Central Bank (ECB) has introduced several monetary easing measures in            recent months. In particular, the ECB expanded the asset purchase program it            introduced last September to include sovereign, agency and European institution            securities in an effort to reduce longer-term interest rates, increase business            and consumer confidence, and in turn encourage greater lending and investment.            Expectations of lower long-term interest rates have also contributed to the            depreciation of the euro in recent months, which should support European export            competitiveness. Asset purchases by the ECB are being made at a rate of €;60 billion per month from March 2015 to at least September 2016 for a total            of €;1.1 trillion (or about 10 per cent of GDP), comparable in size to the            most recent asset purchase program by the U.S. Federal Reserve that ran from            September 2012 to October 2014.

Overall, the IMF expects real GDP growth in the euro area to            pick up to 1.5 per cent in 2015 and 1.6 per cent in 2016 as the            impacts of recent monetary policy easing, lower oil            prices and the recent depreciation of the euro feed through the economy.

In the United Kingdom, stronger private domestic demand            contributed to a pickup in economic growth to 2.8 per cent in 2014 from 1.7 per            cent in 2013. The IMF expects that growth will remain at around this pace this            year before slowing somewhat to 2.3 per cent in 2016.

Japan

In Japan, economic growth exhibited large swings during            2014, in large part reflecting the impacts of recent policy changes. In            particular, real GDP contracted in the second and third quarters of 2014            following the April 2014 consumption tax increase before rebounding to 1.5 per cent            in the fourth quarter. Overall, the economy recorded no growth in 2014            following an increase of 1.6 per cent in 2013.

The IMF projects that Japanese economic growth will only            improve modestly to 1.0 per cent in 2015 and            1.2 per cent in 2016, in spite of the expected positive impacts of            recent monetary policy easing, lower oil prices and exchange            rate depreciation.

Emerging Economies

Growth in emerging economies eased in 2014, driven by            negative developments in a number of large economies. In particular, growth in            China slowed, Brazil's economy stagnated and the Russian economy is now likely            in recession. This was partly offset by an acceleration of the pace of            expansion in India (Chart 2.3). Looking ahead, the IMF expects overall            growth in emerging economies to be 4.3 per cent this year, slightly            lower than its 2014 pace, before picking up to 4.7 per cent in 2016.

In China, real GDP growth eased to 7.4 per cent in 2014            from 7.8 per cent in 2013, compared with growth of about 9 per cent on average            over the previous five years. In the first quarter of 2015, growth            continued to slow to 5.3 per cent. In light of more modest growth, Chinese            policy-makers undertook a number of recent stimulus measures, including an            easing of mortgage policies, a reduction in monetary policy rates in November            2014 and then again in March of this year, and an increase in budgeted            government spending this year including an acceleration of already-planned            infrastructure projects.

Looking ahead, the IMF expects authorities to put a greater            weight on reducing financial sector vulnerabilities, stemming in particular            from the housing market and the shadow banking sector. As a result, growth is            expected to be 6.8 per cent in 2015, in line with the revised official growth            target of about 7 per cent for the year, and to slow further to 6.3 per cent in            2016. Nevertheless, there are significant risks associated with the challenge            of shifting towards a more sustainable growth model in China with greater            reliance on domestic consumption. As well, managing the ongoing adjustment of            the housing market may prove to be more difficult than expected.

United States

In the face of global challenges, the U.S. economy continues            to show a pickup in underlying growth. Despite a temporary setback at the start            of 2014, the economic expansion has subsequently strengthened, averaging almost            4 per cent growth over the last three quarters of the year.

While growth was modest in the            fourth quarter of 2014 and in early 2015, it is expected to strengthen going            forward. U.S. labour market conditions have continued to improve, as monthly            job gains have picked up from about 190,000 on average over the 2011-2013 period to 260,000 on average last year, the fastest annual            pace since the late 1990s. As well, monetary policy is expected to remain            highly accommodative. Financial markets expect the Federal Reserve to tighten            only gradually, beginning in the second half of this year, because of            still-elevated labour market slack and softening inflation.

Although the U.S. has become the largest producer of            oil in the world, it also remains a net importer and the world's largest oil            consumer. As a result, the decline in oil prices will boost U.S. economic            activity, with lower gasoline prices translating into significant real income            gains for households. However, this positive impact may be partly offset            by the appreciation of the U.S. dollar in recent months, which could weigh            on U.S. exports.

On balance, private sector economists in the March            survey expect real GDP growth to be steady at 2.3 per cent in the            first quarter of 2015 and then strengthen to around 3 per cent for the            rest of the year (Chart 2.4). On an annual basis, growth is projected to be            3.1 per cent in 2015, up from 2.4 per cent in 2014, and to remain close to            3 per cent in 2016. Recent economic indicators suggest that growth in            the first quarter of 2015 may be softer than expected, due in part to temporary            factors such as severe winter weather.

Financial Market Developments

Ongoing global economic weakness, along with low expected            inflation in most advanced economies, has led to a trend decline in long-term            interest rates since early 2014 (Chart 2.5). In particular, 10-year            government bond rates for Germany and other euro area economies are at record            lows, with yields for German 5-year government bonds falling into negative            territory for the first time in history.

While U.S. government bond rates also remain very low,            expectations of eventual monetary policy rate increases have boosted government            bond rates in that country modestly since the end of January 2015. In contrast,            Canadian 10-year bond rates have remained broadly stable at about 1.5 per cent            since the beginning of the year.

Most major currencies have lost ground to the U.S.            dollar since mid-2014. For the euro area and Japan, this reflected economic            weakness relative to the U.S. and widening interest rate differentials due to            expected divergence in monetary policies. While the Canadian dollar has also            been affected by the latter factor, the decline in crude oil prices has also            put significant downward pressure on the exchange rate (Chart 2.6).

Commodity Prices

After trading broadly in the US$80 to US$110 per barrel            range over much of the prior two years, West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil            prices have declined sharply since June 2014, with about half of the decline            occurring since the 2014 Update of Economic and Fiscal Projections (Fall            Update) in November (Chart 2.7). While prices have largely stabilized in            the US$45 to US$55 range since the beginning of February, they are about 50 per            cent below their recent peak in late June 2014. Although the decline has been            cushioned to some extent for Canadian producers by a lower Canadian dollar            and reduced spreads to the U.S. WTI benchmark, the Canadian effective            price (CEP) price is still down sharply since last June.

The drop in WTI oil prices—55 per cent between June            2014 and January 2015—is the third largest decline in the last three            decades (Chart 2.8). In comparison, prices fell 62 per cent in 1986            (when Saudi Arabia suspended its role as the swing producer of the Organization            of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and increased production) and            remained at very low levels for close to a decade. During the 2008-2009            global recession, prices dropped by 71 per cent from a record high,            but rebounded rapidly over the following year. Although there is            considerable uncertainty over the path of crude oil prices going forward in the            current episode, most private sector economists expect that prices will remain            low over the first half of 2015 before recovering gradually to levels still            below those seen in mid-2014.

The decline in oil prices has occurred in the context of a            relatively weak global economic environment, and hence only modest demand            growth for oil. However, the primary driver of the drop in prices has been            increased oil supply, with increased production in the United States            representing over 85 per cent of the incremental rise in global            production since 2011 (Chart 2.9).

The increase in U.S. oil production began to accelerate            rapidly after 2011 in particular (Chart 2.10), with additional            production reaching more than 4 million barrels per day as of March 2015            (resulting in an increase of over 5 per cent in global oil supply). Virtually            all of this production has been shale oil production from reserves made            economically viable by new drilling technology and innovations.

Until the spring of 2014 this increase in U.S.            production was more than offset by unplanned production outages elsewhere in            the world (most notably in Libya and Iraq, due to geopolitical unrest). As a            result, global prices remained broadly stable through the first half of 2014.            However, by mid-2014, markets reached a tipping point. The net increase in U.S.            production was exceeding decreases in production due to production outages            elsewhere, inventory levels began to rise, and prices began to decline. Prices            were further dampened by a downward revision to the global oil demand            projection from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's            International Energy Agency in early October, as well as in response to the            IMF's release of its October World            Economic Outlook , which showed a downgrade to global growth expectations.            Finally, the price decline accelerated sharply following OPEC's November 27            decision to maintain its production targets to protect market share.

As U.S. shale oil production            has been the main driver of the growth in global supply, most market analysts            anticipate that crude oil prices will not begin to rebound until there is            evidence of a meaningful decline in U.S. production. As shown in            Chart 2.11, the number of active rigs dedicated to oil production in the            U.S. has already started to decline. But this has not translated into actual            production declines. This is because producers are shutting down their least            productive rigs and refocusing efforts on fields with lower costs and higher            productivity. As a result, production has broadly plateaued thus far in 2015            and is likely to gradually decline later this year. However, as the technology            in this industry is relatively new, and underlying production costs continue to            decline, there is considerable uncertainty over the actual timing and            magnitude of the expected decline in production.

Since the Fall Update, prices for most other            commodities have also declined, although, in general, by much less than crude            oil prices. For most non-oil commodities much of these price declines have            reflected supply factors. However, at least some of the recent declines,            particularly for lumber and base metals, appear to be linked to soft            demand (Chart 2.12).

Canada's Economic Performance

Despite a weak global economic environment, Canada continues            to lead all other G-7 economies in real GDP growth over the recovery            (Chart 2.13).

Canada's strong economic performance has been driven by a            solid domestic economy, with Canada enjoying ongoing growth in private domestic            demand since the end of the recession. This sustained growth has been supported            by the strongest growth in real business investment in the G-7 over the            recovery (Chart 2.14).

Reflecting this solid domestic performance, over 1.2 million            more Canadians are working now than at the end of the recession in June            2009—one of the strongest job creation records in the G-7 over this            period (Chart 2.15). The majority of these net new jobs have been            full-time positions in high-wage, private sector industries—an essential            condition for a sustained recovery and expansion.

When measured on a comparable basis, Canada's unemployment            rate is now slightly higher than that in the U.S. 1 (Chart 2.16),            despite the fact that job growth since 
                    pre-recession peaks has been twice as fast in Canada as in the United States.            This is largely a result of the large difference in the evolution of labour            force participation rates between the two countries over this period. The            Canadian labour force participation rate stands at 65.9 per cent, 3.2            percentage points higher than in the U.S., where the participation rate has            fallen sharply since mid-2009 and stands at a 37-year low.

Population            aging, reflected in a rapidly increasing number of individuals of retirement            age, has led to declines in the participation rates of both the U.S.            and Canada over the last several years. However, in the U.S. these            underlying demographic forces have been aggravated by deeper and more            protracted labour market weakness during the recession and recovery. This has            resulted in many more middle-aged and older individuals retiring or withdrawing            permanently from the labour market, due to a lack of employment opportunities.            In contrast, Canada's better labour market performance over the recovery has            served to mitigate the impacts of an aging population, and an increasing number            of older individuals have chosen to remain actively engaged in the labour            market.

While Canada's economic record over the recession and            recovery has been strong, particularly relative to its peer countries in the G-7,            Canada has not been immune to external developments, with weak external demand            growth weighing on Canadian exports. Without solid growth in global demand for            Canadian products, the incentive for businesses to take on additional capacity            has waned. As a result, real business investment growth has slowed to an annual            rate of less than 1 per cent since mid-2012—compared with            almost 12 per cent on average earlier in the recovery.

Encouragingly, exports have shown signs of firming more            recently. After posting average growth of just 1.2 per cent per quarter over            2012 and 2013, real exports grew by 6.8 per cent on average during 2014,            in line with stronger growth in U.S. demand (Chart 2.17). Further,            the depreciation of the Canadian dollar has improved the international            competitive position of Canadian firms. This, along with expected stronger U.S.            economic growth, points to stronger production and exports in non-energy            sectors going forward.

The degree to which Canadian manufacturing firms will be            able to respond to expected stronger U.S. growth varies by sub-sector. Capacity            utilization rates (the degree to which firms are employing their productive            resources) in many sub-sectors are still below their pre-recession peaks. In            addition, many sub-sectors remain well below historical highs. In other            sub-sectors, notably transportation equipment and wood products, capacity            utilization rates are either at or close to their historical peaks. In            sub-sectors where current capacity is more limited, there will be a greater            impetus to make capacity-increasing investments in the face of improving            demand (Chart 2.18).

More generally, a durable increase in demand will provide            greater incentives for increased investment in the manufacturing sector and            elsewhere in the economy, which in turn will lead to higher productive capacity            and higher real GDP growth (Chart 2.19).

Residential investment has            also been an important contributor to Canadian GDP growth both before the            2008-2009 global recession and over most of the            recovery. This has been driven by Canadian households taking advantage of solid            employment gains and low interest rates to invest in housing assets—whether            they are purchasing their first homes, moving into larger homes or renovating            existing homes. Reflecting this, the pace of household debt accumulation            relative to disposable income increased between 2002 and the depths of the            global recession in mid-2009, before slowing and then broadly stabilizing at an            elevated level since 2012 (Chart 2.20).

Higher debt loads leave the household sector more            vulnerable to income shocks or a sudden and sharp increase in            interest rates. However, as households have accumulated debt in a very low            interest rate environment, the cost of servicing that debt is at a record low.            As of the fourth quarter of 2014, household interest payments as a share of            disposable income stood at 6.9 per cent, the lowest level since data are            available starting in 1990 (Chart 2.21). Total debt payments, which include            principal reimbursement, also remain manageable. For example, a measure of the            mortgage debt-service ratio—the ratio of mortgage principal and interest            payments on an average-priced property relative to average household pre-tax            income assuming a 5 per cent down payment, which is typical for a            first-time homebuyer—remains in line with its historical average.

The Government tightened the rules governing            government-backed insured mortgages four times since 2008. Following the            implementation of these measures, there has been an appropriate and desirable            moderation in housing market activity in most regional markets across Canada.            Toronto and Vancouver, in contrast, have continued to experience periods of            strong sales and price growth, with housing market strength in these cities            supported by factors such as population growth and land scarcity. More            recently, uncertainty about future economic conditions resulting from lower oil            prices has led to a slowing of housing market activity and lower prices            throughout Alberta and Saskatchewan.

Impacts of Lower Oil Prices on the            Canadian Economy

The decline in global crude oil prices since mid-2014 will            have impacts throughout the global economy, resulting in an income transfer            from relatively few oil exporting countries to many oil importing countries. As            a result, for the global economy the net impact is positive, as lower energy            costs translate into real income gains and stronger economic activity for            households and firms.

However, as Canada is a net oil exporter, lower oil prices            will have a net negative impact on Canada's growth prospects, particularly            through the price channel (GDP inflation) and to a lesser extent activity (real            GDP).

The impact of lower crude oil            prices on GDP inflation will be negative, largely reflecting lower crude oil            export prices. In particular, the value of Canada's crude oil exports            in the second quarter of 2014 (before the decline in oil prices) was $100 billion, or 5.1 per cent of nominal GDP. The decline in crude oil export            prices reduced the value of exports, and hence nominal GDP, by almost $40 billion (2 per cent of GDP) between the second quarter of 2014 and            February 2015 (export volumes have remained broadly unchanged).

Consumer prices have also been affected by lower crude oil            prices, with Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation down dramatically from its            peak of 2.4 per cent in October 2014 to 1.2 per cent as of March 2015. This            entirely reflects lower gasoline prices, which have seen their largest declines            since the 2008-2009 global recession (Chart 2.22).            In contrast, core inflation, which excludes the impact of gasoline and            other volatile items, has remained near 2 per cent.

The impacts of sustained low oil prices on Canadian real GDP            are mixed.

Lower crude oil prices result in a reduction in the incomes,            or corporate profits, of firms in the energy sector. Lower corporate profits in            the energy sector will first affect real GDP through weaker investment and            hiring within the energy sector, which will eventually lead to reduced            production in the sector. However, over time, these negative effects will be            offset to some extent by the positive impacts of lower crude oil prices on the            non-energy sectors of the Canadian economy—which are responsible for the large            majority of goods and services produced in Canada and exported.

Lower crude oil prices will have a much different            impact on the incomes of Canadian households. Lower employment in the energy            sector will have some negative effects on household income. In addition,            insofar as Canadians are shareholders of firms in the energy sector (through            their direct investments, as well as through their holdings of mutual funds,            private pension plans, etc.), lower equity prices in the energy sector will            have an impact on household wealth, which could modestly reduce consumer            spending if the decline in oil prices persists. However, these negative impacts            will be more than offset by the immediate real income gains associated with lower            gasoline and other energy-related prices. Households spent $48 billion on            gasoline and motor oil in the second quarter of 2014. The            decline in gasoline prices between mid-2014 and the first quarter of 2015            (approximately 25 per cent) freed up approximately $12 billion (over            1 per cent of total consumer spending) for households to spend on other goods            and services. This real income gain will support consumer spending going            forward.

There are also some important offsetting factors that are            largely external to Canada. The global economy will benefit from lower crude            oil prices, in particular the U.S. economy as it remains a significant net            importer of crude oil. A stronger U.S. economy will benefit Canada as it is the            destination for nearly 75 per cent of Canadian exports. In addition, the            lower value of the dollar has both cushioned the decline in crude oil prices            received by Canadian energy producers and boosted the international competitive            position of Canadian manufacturers and exporters. This too will provide            support to real GDP growth by making non-energy exports, which account for            about 80 per cent of Canada's total goods exports, more attractive.

Further, the reduction in the target for the overnight rate            by the Bank of Canada on January 21, 2015 has led to lower borrowing costs for            households and businesses, which should also help support domestic economic            activity going forward.

Government Actions Will Support Economic Growth and            Job Creation

Actions taken by the Government over the past year will also            help to further support economic growth and job creation in Canada. On a cash            basis, these include:

Support for Canadian families through the Family              Tax Cut and Universal Child Care Benefit enhancements totalling $7.8              billion in 2015–16 and over $4.5 billion ongoing.

Support for small businesses through the Small              Business Job Credit and Employment Insurance (EI) premium freezes for three              years, followed by a committed reduction in EI premiums to a seven-year              break-even rate in 2017.

$5.8 billion in new investments that will              continue to build and renew federal infrastructure across the country, with the              majority of this support being delivered within three years.

These measures, together with measures announced in Economic            Action Plan 2015, total almost $10 billion in 2015–16, or 0.5 per cent of GDP,            and average $8.5 billion per year thereafter, on a cash basis (Chart            2.23). This will provide significant support to the Canadian economy starting            in the second quarter of 2015.

Canadian Economic Outlook—Private Sector Forecasts

The average of private sector economic forecasts has been            used as the basis for fiscal planning since 1994 and introduces an element of            independence into the Government's fiscal forecast. This practice has been            supported by international organizations such as the IMF.

The Department of Finance regularly surveys private sector            economists on their views on the outlook for the Canadian economy. The economic            forecast presented in this section is based on a survey conducted in March            2015, and includes the views of 15 private sector economists.

The March 2015 survey of private sector economists            included:

BMO Capital Markets,

Caisse              de dépôt et placement du Québec,

Canadian Federation of Independent Business,

CIBC World Markets,

The Conference Board of Canada,

Desjardins,

Deutsche Bank of Canada,

IHS Global Insight,

Industrial Alliance Insurance and Financial              Services Inc.,

Laurentian Bank Securities,

National Bank Financial Group,

Royal Bank of Canada,

Scotiabank,

TD Bank Financial Group, and

the University of              Toronto (Policy and Economic Analysis Program).

Relative to the September 2014 survey presented in the            Fall Update, private sector economists have revised down their near-term            outlooks for both real GDP and, more significantly, GDP inflation, largely            reflecting the economic impacts of lower crude oil prices. The economists now            expect real GDP growth of 1.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2015, rising            gradually to 2.3 per cent by the fourth quarter of the year. The expected            impact on economy-wide prices is significantly larger, with the economists now            expecting GDP prices to decline by 3.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2015,            following a drop of 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2014. As a result,            economists expect nominal GDP to decline by 2 per cent in the first quarter of            2015. Growth in nominal GDP is expected to resume and accelerate though the            rest of 2015, closing the year at a healthy 5 per cent pace (Table 2.1).

Reflecting the downward revision to the near-term outlook,            the economists expect nominal GDP growth of 1.6 per cent in 2015, down from 4.3 per cent in the September survey (Chart 2.24). Nominal GDP growth            over the remainder of the forecast horizon has been revised up modestly. As a            result, the level of nominal GDP is expected to be $55 billion lower in 2015            relative to the September survey, with this gap narrowing to under $50 billion            thereafter.

The economists expect the unemployment rate to continue to            gradually decline over the forecast horizon and reach 6.1 per cent in 2019.

CPI inflation is projected to increase by just 0.9 per cent            in 2015 as a result of declines in gasoline prices before firming to 2.2 per            cent in 2016. The economists expect core inflation to remain stable around 2 per cent throughout 2015 and over the remainder of the forecast horizon.

The economists have revised down their outlooks for            short- and long-term interest rates relative to the September survey. The            economists now expect 3-month treasury bill rates to average 0.6 per cent in            2015 (down from 1.2 per cent in the September survey), gradually climbing to            3.0 per cent by 2019. Similarly, they expect 10-year Government of Canada bond            rates to average 1.7 per cent in 2015 (down from 3.0 per cent in the            September survey) and to rise to 3.9 per cent by 2019.

The economists have also significantly revised down their            outlooks for crude oil prices. In the March survey, the economists expect WTI            crude oil prices to average US$54 per barrel in 2015, down from expectations of            US$96 in September. The economists expect prices to rise to US$67 in 2016 before            gradually climbing to the US$80 range by 2019, well below the September outlook            of US$100.

The September private sector survey outlook for crude oil            prices was not used for fiscal planning in the Fall Update, reflecting the            decline in crude oil prices between the time of the September 2014 survey and            the Fall Update in mid-November. In the Fall Update, WTI crude oil prices were            assumed to remain at US$81 per barrel from late 2014 to 2019, consistent            with a level of nominal GDP $3 billion below the September survey in 2014            and $16 billion below per year thereafter.

WTI crude oil prices are now expected to be almost US$30 per            barrel below the Fall Update assumption in 2015, with prices expected to return            to the US$80-range by 2019. For its part, the March 2015 private sector            forecast for nominal GDP is $39 billion lower than the Fall Update outlook            for 2015, with this gap narrowing to $32 billion lower by            2019 (Table 2.3).

Risk Assessment

On April 9, 2015, the Minister of Finance met with the            private sector economists to discuss the economic projections resulting from            the March 2015 survey, as well as the risks surrounding the outlook. At that            time, the economists agreed that the average forecast from the March survey was            a reasonable basis for fiscal planning.

The risks to the economic outlook remain and are largely            external to the Canadian economy, stemming from uncertainty surrounding both            the future path of oil prices and global growth.

Crude oil prices have declined markedly since the time of            the Fall Update. While private sector economists expect prices to reclaim some            of their lost ground starting later this year, the risk of sustained low prices            or even additional declines remains a possibility, in particular if there is no            meaningful sustained decline in global supply.

Further, there is uncertainty over the magnitude of the            impact of lower oil prices on the Canadian economy. In the March survey,            private sector economists anticipate that real GDP growth will slow from 2.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2014 to 1.2 per cent in the first            quarter of 2015. However, economic data to date for early 2015 suggest that            real GDP growth in the first quarter is likely to be weaker than expected, or            even flat. At the same time, however, price indicators, including terms of            trade, suggest that the decline in GDP inflation in the first quarter could be            smaller than expected in the March survey, which would leave nominal GDP growth            in the quarter broadly in line with expectations in the March survey.

Beyond 2015, the Department of Finance considers that the            average private sector forecast for GDP inflation in the March survey is            prudent. Indeed, the projected modest pickup in GDP inflation over this period            despite a robust recovery in oil prices is consistent with falling non-energy            commodity prices which would offset some of the terms-of-trade gains (higher            export prices relative to import prices) resulting from higher oil prices.            Overall, this leads to prudent assumptions for the commodity price outlook in            the March survey of private sector economists.

Persistently lacklustre global growth poses further            risks to the forecast. Economic growth has remained weak and uneven in the euro            area. While the risk of a sovereign debt crisis has receded with the recent            temporary financing agreement for Greece, negotiations are ongoing and could            result in renewed financial market uncertainty and volatility. There is also            the possibility of a deeper slowdown in emerging economies. As a result, there            is a risk that global growth could once again surprise on the            downside (Chart 2.25).

Reflecting the repeated downward revisions to global            growth, the outlook for interest rates has also been revised down in recent            years, with economists repeatedly pushing back the path of expected interest            rate increases (Chart 2.26). Should global growth fail to pick up as            expected, it is likely that interest rates could once again be lower than            currently expected.

The U.S. economy, Canada's largest trading partner, could be            stronger than anticipated, given the recent stronger-than-expected performance            of U.S. labour markets and the anticipated boost to growth from lower crude oil            prices. At the same time, recent economic indicators suggest that U.S. economic            growth has not accelerated as expected in early 2015.

From a domestic perspective, elevated levels of            household debt continue to pose a risk to the outlook. In particular, should            the economy be significantly weaker than expected and unemployment increases            substantially, households may reduce their spending more than they would if            they had lower debt levels.

Planning Assumptions

In light of these risks, for fiscal planning purposes, the            Government is adjusting downward the private sector forecast for nominal GDP by            $7 billion for 2015 through 2017, $13 billion for 2018, and $20 billion in 2019            (Table 2.4). The Government will continue to evaluate economic            developments and risks to determine whether or not it would be appropriate to            maintain this adjustment for risk in the future. As discussed in            Chapter 5.2, this translates to a set-aside for contingencies of $1.0 billion per year between 2015–16 and 2017–18, $2.0 billion in 2018–19 and            $3.0 billion in 2019–20.

1 Conceptual            differences raise the Canadian unemployment rate relative to the U.S. rate. In            particular, Statistics Canada considers as unemployed those passively looking            for work (e.g. reading want ads) as well as those who will begin work in the            near future, while the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics does not include            either group in the labour force. In addition, the            Canadian methodology includes 15-year-olds (who have a higher-than-average            unemployment rate), while the U.S. does not.



<<< source: ch3-0-eng.html >>>

Chapter 3.0 - Creating Jobs and Economic Growth

Introduction

Canada’s Economic Action Plan continues to support job  creation and promote economic growth. The Government of Canada’s Plan has  allowed Canada to recover all of the jobs lost during the global recession—supporting  the creation of over 1.2 million net new jobs since the depths of the  downturn. Given ongoing global economic uncertainty, however, the Government  remains focused on supporting job creation and economic growth.

To this end, Economic Action Plan 2015 builds on the  Government’s plan for jobs and growth by:

Supporting  the manufacturing sector and investing in advanced research by keeping  taxes low, supporting Canada’s manufacturing and processing companies, and  investing in world-class advanced research.

Helping  small businesses and entrepreneurs create jobs by fuelling small business  growth, fostering entrepreneurship, and reducing red tape and the tax  compliance burden.

Training  a highly skilled workforce by helping Canadians acquire the skills that  will get them new and better jobs.

Investing  in infrastructure by introducing a new and innovative Public Transit Fund—the  Government’s largest targeted infrastructure program to promote public transit  infrastructure investment in a manner that is affordable for taxpayers and  efficient for commuters.

Growing  trade and expanding markets by securing preferential terms of trade and  investment with other nations, helping Canadian businesses fully  capitalize on global opportunities, and responsibly developing Canada’s natural  resources.



<<< source: ch4-0-eng.html >>>

Chapter 4.0: Prosperous Families and Strong,  Secure Communities

Introduction

The Government is continuing to take action to improve the  lives of Canadians and their families so that they have opportunities to work,  live and prosper in safe and vibrant communities. Economic Action Plan 2015  builds on previous actions taken by the Government to support families and  communities, improving the quality of life for hard-working Canadian families  by:

Helping  families make ends meet by continuing to provide tax relief, supporting  seniors and caregivers, protecting consumers and limiting taxpayer exposure in  the financial sector.

Building  strong communities by helping the charitable and non-profit sector,  ensuring that veterans and their families receive the benefits and services  they need, supporting affordable housing, further assisting persons with  disabilities, increasing economic opportunities for Aboriginal peoples, and ensuring  international development initiatives are effective and aligned with the  priorities of Canadians.

Celebrating  and protecting Canada's heritage and environment by supporting the upcoming  Canada 150 celebrations, protecting species at risk, maintaining meteorological  and navigational warning services in the Arctic, and addressing toxic  substances and contaminated sites.

Better  protecting Canadians from the threat of terrorism and cyber attacks,  maintaining the integrity of our borders and supporting the Canadian Armed  Forces as they continue to uphold Canadian interests and values. In addition,  the Government will introduce new legislative and regulatory amendments to  improve the effectiveness of Canada's economic sanctions regime.



<<< source: ch5-0-eng.html >>>

Chapter 5.0 - Balancing  the Budget

Highlights

The  Government is fulfilling its promise to balance the budget in 2015.

Balanced  budgets keep taxes low and ensure that taxpayer dollars are used to support the  programs that Canadians depend on rather than paying interest costs.

The  deficit has been reduced from $55.6 billion at the height of the global  economic and financial crisis to a projected surplus of $1.4 billion in  2015–16.

The federal  debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio is expected to fall to 27.9 per  cent in 2017–18, below its pre-recession low, putting the Government on track  to meeting its target of 25 per cent by 2021.

Canada’s  total government net debt burden is the lowest of any Group of Seven (G-7)  country and among the lowest of the advanced G-20 countries.

The  Government will introduce balanced budget legislation to enshrine in law its  prudent approach to fiscal planning.

To support  debt reduction, the Government is planning on dedicating the amounts set aside  for contingencies, if not required, to reduce the federal debt.

To ensure  that the Government continues to do business with ethical suppliers in Canada  and abroad, a new government-wide procurement integrity framework will be  introduced.

The  Government is also proposing new measures as part of its ongoing effort to  strengthen tax compliance, and improve the fairness and integrity of the tax  system, to ensure everyone pays their fair share.



<<< source: anx1-eng.html >>>

Annex 1 - Maintaining Fiscal Balance  in the Federation

Highlights

There is  no fiscal imbalance in Canada.

All  governments have the capacity to balance their budgets.

Since  2006, the Government has pursued a low-tax plan that has significantly reduced  the tax burden on Canadians through broad-based tax cuts and targeted  relief for individuals, families and businesses.

At the  same time, the Government has placed major transfers to the provinces and  territories on a sustainable, predictable growth track.

The four  major transfers to provinces and territories will amount to almost  $68 billion in 2015–16, an increase of more than $3 billion over 2014–15  and an increase of almost 63 per cent since 2005–06.

The  federal government has worked to eliminate its deficit while continuing  to increase support to provinces, territories and individuals.

Over the  next five years, the federal government will make projected total additional  investments of $27 billion in the Canada Health Transfer, $6 billion in the  Canada Social Transfer, $10 billion in Equalization and $1 billion in  Territorial Formula Financing.

The  federal government continues to make significant investments in areas that will  benefit provincial and territorial economies, including unprecedented support  for infrastructure.

All levels  of government are responsible for responding to their own fiscal pressures and  ensuring spending does not exceed revenues.

Maintaining Fiscal Balance in the Federation

There is no fiscal imbalance between the federal government  and the provinces. A fiscal imbalance could be created when federal  transfers to provinces and territories are significantly cut and the federal  tax burden is increased at the same time. The federal government has adopted  the exact opposite approach. Since 2006, the Government has pursued a low-tax  plan to support job creation and economic growth. As part of this plan, the  Government has increased major transfers to provinces and territories, reduced  taxes on individuals, families and businesses, and balanced the budget.  Budgetary pressures faced by provinces and territories are due to their own  spending plans.

Federal, provincial and territorial governments in Canada  each have access to all of the tools necessary to deliver the public  services under their respective areas of responsibility and manage their public  finances responsibly. Each level of government is accountable to their residents  for taxing and spending decisions.

All levels of government must be responsible stewards of  taxpayer dollars and control public spending to achieve balanced budgets. Provincial  and territorial governments have access to virtually all of the same sources of  revenue as the federal government. In addition, provincial and territorial  governments have other significant revenue streams such as royalties from  natural resources and profits from lotteries and gaming that, with limited  exceptions, do not generally benefit the federal government (see below).

In 2012, according to the Organisation for Economic  Co-operation and Development (OECD), nearly 50 per cent of all tax revenues in  Canada were collected by provincial, territorial and local governments—a share  that is higher than in other federations (Chart A1.1).

The Government Has Cut Taxes Significantly

Lower taxes drive economic growth. That is why the  Government of Canada has consistently cut taxes since 2006. Federal revenues as  a proportion of gross domestic product (GDP) have declined substantially since  2006–07 and are at their lowest level in over 50 years (Chart A1.2). This is  due primarily to broad-based federal tax cuts and targeted relief for  individuals, families and businesses, which is also good for the economy. A  lower tax burden at the federal level gives the provinces and territories more  flexibility to address their own economic challenges.

The broad-based federal tax cuts and targeted relief for  individuals, families and businesses introduced since 2006 include:

Reducing the Goods and Services Tax rate to 5  per cent from 7 per cent.

Increasing the amount of income that all  Canadians can earn without paying federal income tax.

Reducing the lowest personal income tax rate to  15 per cent from 16 per cent.

Increasing the upper limit of the two lowest  personal income tax brackets so that individuals can earn more income  before being subject to higher federal tax rates.

Reducing the federal general corporate income  tax rate to 15 per cent from 22.12 per cent.

Reducing the small business corporate income tax  rate to 11 per cent and increasing the amount of annual income  eligible for this lower rate to $500,000. Economic Action Plan 2015 proposes to  further reduce the small business tax rate by 2 percentage points.

At the same  time, the Government of Canada has maintained vital public services and  continued to invest in infrastructure across Canada. In order to see growth in  jobs and the economy, all levels of government must ensure their fiscal houses  are in order. Running deficits will only increase the debt burden on taxpayers.  Higher debt will result in higher debt servicing costs, putting vital services  at risk. Furthermore, ongoing deficits prevent governments from taking steps to  make their economic environments competitive. That is why the federal  government has consistently acted to responsibly reduce spending without  compromising services to Canadians.

The Government Has Increased Financial Support to  the Provinces and Territories

The Government of Canada has taken responsible steps to  achieve a balanced budget without reducing transfers to individuals or  provinces and territories. All levels of government are responsible for  responding to their own fiscal pressures. In order to return to balanced budgets,  governments must take steps to ensure spending does not exceed revenues.

Upon taking office in 2006, the Government committed to  respond to concerns about the fiscal imbalance and to work to ensure that  fiscal arrangements provide all governments with access to the resources they  need to meet their responsibilities.

Subsequently, the Government invested more than $39  billion over seven years for shared priorities and placed all major fiscal  transfers on a long-term, principle-based growth track. Investments to support  provinces and territories include:

Enriching the Equalization program and  introducing new Equalization and Territorial Formula Financing formulas based  on the recommendations of an expert panel.

Enriching the Canada Social Transfer and moving to  an equal per capita cash allocation for both the Canada Social Transfer  and the Canada Health Transfer.

Ensuring that transfers grow in a sustainable  and predictable manner.

In addition to the growth in major transfers, the Government  has made significant investments in areas that will benefit provincial and  territorial economies, including actions taken in Economic Action Plan 2013 to  provide over $53 billion for infrastructure over the next decade to support  investments in areas such as roads, bridges, public transit, drinking water and  community infrastructure. Furthermore, in Economic Action Plan 2015, the  Government is proposing to provide an additional $750 million over two years,  starting in 2017–18, and $1 billion per year ongoing thereafter, for a new and  innovative Public Transit Fund to promote public transit infrastructure  investment in a manner that is affordable for taxpayers and efficient for  commuters.

Major Transfers Are at an All-Time High and Will  Continue to Grow

Today, transfers to the provinces and territories are at an  all-time high and will continue to grow moving forward. In 2015–16, the four  major transfers to provinces and territories will amount to almost $68 billion 1 ,  an increase of more than $3 billion over 2014–15 and an increase of almost 63  per cent since 2005–06 (Chart A1.3). Over this period, the Equalization  program has grown by 59 per cent, the Territorial Formula Financing program by  73 per cent, the Canada Health Transfer by 68 per cent and the  Canada Social Transfer by 54 per cent.

Ensuring a strong, publicly funded health care system  remains a top priority for the Government. This is why the Canada Health  Transfer will continue to grow to record levels over the coming years. Specifically,  it will grow at an annual rate of 6 per cent for two more years and, beginning  in 2017–18, it will grow in line with nominal GDP, with a guaranteed minimum  funding growth rate of 3 per cent per year. This growth path  demonstrates the Government’s commitment to a publicly funded, universally  accessible health care system that respects the principles of the Canada Health Act and recognizes that  health care is an area of provincial jurisdiction. On this path, the Canada  Health Transfer is projected to grow from $34 billion in 2015–16 to $40.9  billion by 2019–20. This funding will provide certainty and stability to the  provinces and territories as they take action to put their respective health  care systems on sustainable spending paths. The Canada Health Transfer will be  reviewed in 2024.

The Canada Social Transfer provides financial support  to provinces and territories for post-secondary education, social assistance  and social services, as well as programs for children. The Canada Social  Transfer will continue to grow at its current rate of 3 per cent per  year in 2015–16 and beyond. It will also be reviewed in 2024.

Programs to reduce fiscal  disparities among provinces and territories are important components of  Canada’s system of fiscal federalism. This is why the Government continues to  provide significant and growing support through both the Equalization and  Territorial Formula Financing programs. Going forward, Equalization will  continue to grow in line with nominal GDP, and Territorial Formula Financing  will continue to grow based on its current formula.

Federal revenues as a percentage of GDP are at the  lowest level in over 50 years and federal support for provinces and territories  has increased significantly since 2005–06. In fact, major transfers as a  proportion of provincial and territorial revenues are now at the highest level  in over 20 years. Furthermore, major transfers as a proportion of federal  revenues are at the highest level in almost 30 years and as a percentage of  federal expenditures are at the highest level in over 35 years (Chart A1.4).

The Government’s actions have provided provinces and  territories with a strong base of federal support. Even during the global  recession and throughout the subsequent recovery, the Government has not  reduced transfers to provinces and territories. Instead, it has worked to  eliminate its deficit through reductions in direct program spending without  compromising the delivery of priority services to Canadians (Chart A1.5).  As a result, direct program spending has declined for four consecutive years, a  trend that has not been achieved in decades. The Government has also cut taxes  and freed up tax room, supporting economic growth in all provinces  and territories.

Provinces  and territories must make responsible decisions to achieve balanced budgets and  reduce the debt burden on taxpayers, just as the federal government has done.  It is their responsibility to implement prudent spending plans rather than demand  the federal government fix their budgetary problems. Eliminating deficits will  increase economic competitiveness and ensure government funds flow to vital  services, not to service the debt. The Government is encouraged that provinces  in deficit situations have stated that they are committed to returning to  balanced budgets.

1 This amount only includes  payments for Equalization, Territorial Formula Financing, the Canada Health  Transfer and the Canada Social Transfer. It does not match the total for major  transfers to other levels of government shown in Table 5.2.6, which also  includes amounts for the Youth Allowances Recovery, recoveries of Alternative  Payments for Standing Programs, statutory subsidies and payments under the  2005 Offshore Accords.



<<< source: anx2-eng.html >>>

Annex 2 - International Debt Comparisons

Highlights

According  to official statistics published by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and  the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Canada’s  total government net debt is the lowest in the Group of Seven (G-7) and less  than half the average of G-7 countries.

Official  statistics published by the IMF and the OECD, however, overstate Canadian  government debt levels relative to those of most other countries—including most  G-7 countries.

The  relative overstatement of Canadian government debt levels is largely the result  of the slow adoption by many countries of international accounting standards,  which call for the recognition of unfunded public sector employee pension plan  liabilities.

Including  the limited data estimates available for unfunded pension liabilities in debt  statistics shows that Canada’s net debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio  would be by far the lowest in the G-7, with the U.S. and Germany being the next  closest with debt at nearly double that of Canada’s.

It is  important that international investors and credit rating agencies recognize  that Canadian government public sector pension plans are well funded, and that,  as a result, Canadian government debt statistics appear inappropriately high  relative to those of many other countries.

This is  true of the federal government and many of Canada’s provinces.

According to official statistics published by the IMF and  the OECD, Canada’s total government net debt (defined as the total liabilities  less the financial assets of the federal, provincial/territorial and local  governments, as well as the Canada Pension Plan and the Québec Pension Plan) is  the lowest in the G-7 and less than half the average of G-7 countries (Chart  A2.1).

Official statistics published by the IMF and the OECD,  however, overstate Canadian government debt levels relative to those of most  other countries—including most G-7 countries.

Many Countries Have Been Slow to Adopt  International Accounting Standards

The relative overstatement of Canadian government debt  levels is largely the result of the slow adoption by many countries of  international accounting standards, which call for the recognition of unfunded public  sector employee pension plan liabilities in gross and net debt statistics. 1

Canada has always been a world leader in this regard:  Statistics Canada first began including unfunded public sector employee pension  liabilities in Canada’s debt statistics in the Canadian System of National  Accounts in 2002. As of 2015, Canada remains one of only six advanced economies  (the others being Australia, Iceland, New Zealand, Sweden and the United  States) that recognizes these obligations when measuring government  liabilities. 2

Many  countries, including some G-7 countries, do not regularly estimate the size of  their unfunded pension liabilities. Most recent estimates for Germany, France  and the United Kingdom indicate unfunded public sector employee pension  liabilities in the range of 30 to 60 per cent of GDP for Germany, as high as 90  per cent of GDP for France and 58 per cent of GDP for the U.K. 3 Estimates of unfunded public  sector employee pension liabilities are not available for Italy and Japan.  Canada’s unfunded public sector pension liabilities are low by international  standards, at 13 per cent of GDP in 2013 (Table A2.1). This is  largely because Canadian governments have taken an additional step beyond  simply recognizing unfunded liabilities—by moving to fund them. Indeed Canada’s  overall obligation is funded by pension plan assets amounting to 45 per cent of  GDP in 2013. It is important to note that these pension plan assets are for  public sector employees and are distinct from those held in the Canada Pension  Plan and the Québec Pension Plan.

Currently,  the IMF and the OECD remove the unfunded public sector pension plan liabilities  from debt estimates of countries that recognize such liabilities, in an attempt  to render these debt statistics more comparable to those of other countries  that do not recognize them. This adjustment lowered Canada’s gross and net debt  estimates by 13.3 per cent of GDP in 2013. This adjustment, however, does not  go nearly far enough towards putting Canada on a comparable basis, as it only  recognizes a portion of the impact of Canada’s public sector pension plans on its  debt statistics.

Impact of Funding Public Sector Employee Pension  Plans on Government Debt Statistics

As described above, in addition to recognizing its pension  liabilities, Canada (at both the federal and provincial level) has taken significant  steps to fund them. As Canadian governments invest pension plan  contributions in financial assets (as opposed to using the contributions  to pay down market debt), Canada’s market debt rises each year relative to that  of countries that do not recognize or fund their public sector pension  liabilities (instead choosing to use pension contributions to reduce their  market debt). Indeed, with the exception of the U.S., G-7 economies have  accumulated only limited pension plan assets (Table A2.2). As a result,  Canada’s gross debt is significantly overstated relative to countries with  large unfunded liabilities—even after the unfunded portions have been removed. Further,  since Canada’s public sector pension fund assets are not included in the  financial assets of the government sector in the Canadian System of National  Accounts (they are instead contained in a subsector of the corporate sector  known as the trusteed pension plan sector), Canada’s net debt is also  overstated relative to the vast majority of other countries.

Improving  the Comparability of International Debt Statistics

The most direct method to resolve this issue would be for  all countries to recognize their public sector employee pension plan  obligations in their debt statistics. This would put all countries on an  equivalent basis, whether or not they choose to fund their obligations; that  is, countries that use pension contributions to reduce market debt would see  their overall debt increase as the actual obligations associated with those contributions  are recognized in their debt data.

Revisions to the UN System of National Accounts (known  as SNA08)—the most recent international statistical reporting standard—have helped  to improve the coverage of public sector pension obligations with a new “supplementary  table on pensions.” Countries abiding by SNA08 reporting standards, such as  Canada, will provide additional detail on workplace pension schemes, including  public sector employee pension and general social security pension schemes. 4 When this data is  available, the comparability of international debt statistics should improve  considerably. However, it still may take several years for all countries to  adhere to these reporting standards (European Union members, for example, are  not required to publish this supplementary table before 2017).

In early 2014, the OECD surveyed the national statistics  agencies and central banks of all OECD member countries to ascertain the extent  of each member country’s unfunded, partially funded and funded pension  liabilities and assets, and whether the associated assets were held within  the government sector. However, few countries provided additional information  about unfunded public sector pension liabilities in their responses.

Using the limited data estimates available for unfunded  pension liabilities in G-7 economies suggests that net debt ratios would  increase by roughly 75 to 80 per cent for France, Germany and the U.K. if this  data were included in their debt statistics. At 50 per cent of GDP,  Canada’s net debt-to-GDP ratio would be by far the lowest in the G-7, with the  U.S. and Germany being the next closest with debt at nearly double that of  Canada’s (Chart A2.2). However, estimates of the unfunded liabilities of Japan  and Italy are not available, meaning that an estimate of the true G-7 average  (i.e. including liabilities for pension obligations) cannot be calculated.

Until reliable data for public sector pension  obligations are readily available for all countries, an alternative option for  improving the international comparability of Canada’s debt statistics would be  to remove the entire pension obligation from debt statistics—both the unfunded  and funded portions.

This  would essentially be equivalent to recognizing financial assets owned by public  sector pension plans as government financial assets, rather than corporate  sector assets, when calculating debt statistics. Adjusting G-7 net debt-to-GDP  ratios for these assets for international comparison would put Canada in a net  asset position (Chart A2.3). The U.S. and the U.K. would also see significant  reductions in their more-comparable net debt-to-GDP ratios.

Canadian Government Public Sector Pension Plans Are Well Funded

Given the  above, it may not be until 2017 before truly comparable international debt  statistics become available. In the interim, however, it is important that  international investors and credit rating agencies recognize that Canadian  government public sector pension plans are well funded, and that, as a result,  Canadian government debt statistics appear inappropriately high relative to  those of many other countries. This is true of the federal government and many  of Canada’s provinces, including Ontario, Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick  and British Columbia, all of which have employee pension obligations that are  over 90 per cent funded (Table A2.3).

The Government of Canada began funding the pension plans it  sponsors in April 2000. 5 Since that time, contributions by plan members and the federal government to  public service pension plans, for service after March 2000, are tracked by  pension fund accounts but are invested and managed by the independently run  Public Sector Pension Investment Board. Prior to April 2000, federal pension  plans were unfunded. Therefore, the federal government carries obligations for  this earned service but no corresponding asset.

1 Government debt estimates  used for international comparisons are reported on a National Accounts basis,  as opposed to a Public Accounts basis, on which the audited financial  statements and budget documents published by the federal and most provincial governments  are reported.

2 See OECD Economic Outlook No. 95, May 2014, Box 4.7, pp. 236-237.

3 Estimates for the U.K.  include public sector pension reforms undertaken as of 2010.

4 European Union member  countries adhere to the European System of Accounts 2010 reporting standards,  which are broadly consistent with the SNA08 definitions, accounting rules and  classifications.

5 The federal government  currently sponsors defined benefit pension plans for all of its employees,  including members of the public service, certain public service corporations  and territorial governments, the Canadian Forces (including the Reserve Force)  and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. It also has obligations for other plans,  including for Members of Parliament and federally appointed judges, as well as  for its Retirement Compensation Arrangements.



<<< source: anx3-eng.html >>>

Annex 3 - Supporting  a Strong Manufacturing Sector

Overview

Canada’s manufacturing sector is  a cornerstone of the economy. It employs close to 1.7 million Canadians  and drives a high-tech, high-skill economic engine. Manufacturing sales have  rebounded and are up by about 20 per cent since 2009.

Since 2006, the Government has introduced a number of  broad-based and targeted measures to:

Create a low-tax environment for manufacturers.

Expand access to foreign markets.

Support business innovation and world-class  research.

Train a highly skilled workforce.

Create business opportunities through government  procurement.

Actions to advance these priorities, together with new  initiatives in Economic Action Plan 2015 and unprecedented levels of investment  in Canada’s public infrastructure, will help manufacturers to succeed in the  global economy and continue to create jobs, growth and long-term prosperity  across Canada.

In recent years, the federal government    has introduced a number of important fiscal measures that are already making    a significant positive contribution to business investment, innovation, and    job growth. Reductions in the business tax rate, the extension of the    two-year write-off for investments in manufacturing and processing machinery    and equipment, the elimination of import duties on materials and    equipment used in manufacturing, and the signing of key international trade    agreements will set the framework for growth in the future.

Context

The manufacturing sector is a significant part of Canada’s  economy, accounting for more than 10 per cent of Canada’s gross domestic  product (GDP) and 61 per cent of total merchandise exports, and employing 1.7 million people across the country. Its performance is central to the  overall health of the economy.

The sector has responded to the structural challenges of the  last decade by keeping costs low and improving productivity. Unit labour costs  have remained stable over the past five years following steady growth over the  2000s. Manufacturing sector productivity grew steadily over the 2000s and has  accelerated over the past five years (Chart A3.1).

Manufacturers  have long been leaders in investing in research and development, accounting for  almost half of all business sector expenditure in research and development in  2014 (Chart A3.2). Continued investment by manufacturers in innovation and  other drivers of productivity, such as investment in advanced machinery and  equipment and skilled labour, is crucial to the sector’s long-term success. This  continued investment is also necessary to improve Canada’s overall business  productivity performance, a critical determinant of our long-term prosperity.

Economic Action Plan 2015 builds on the Government’s strong  record of support for manufacturers and other businesses with new  initiatives in key areas to help them innovate and compete in the global  economy.

Creating a Low-Tax Environment  for Manufacturers

Improving business tax competitiveness has been a key  element of the Government’s approach to establishing a framework in which  businesses can thrive and compete in the global economy.

Since 2006, the Government has taken significant action to  reduce taxes for businesses in all sectors, including manufacturing. The  federal general corporate income tax rate has been reduced to 15 per cent as of  2012 from 22.12 per cent in 2007. The Government also eliminated the federal  capital tax and helped to secure the elimination of provincial general capital  taxes through a financial incentive.

The Government has also introduced tax measures that support  the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector by encouraging  productivity-enhancing investment in machinery and equipment. Economic Action  Plan 2015 proposes to provide manufacturers with an accelerated capital cost  allowance at a rate of 50 per cent on a declining-balance basis for  assets acquired after 2015 and before 2026 (see Chapter 3.1).

By allowing a substantially faster write-off of eligible  investments than the usual 30-per-cent declining-balance rate, this measure will defer taxes and allow  businesses to recover the cost of capital investments more quickly. This  incentive will provide concrete, long-term support, enabling Canadian manufacturers  to plan the investments that are needed to compete in a global economy. New investment  will help position them to meet both present and future economic challenges,  while creating jobs and growth.

Small businesses are critical to the health of the Canadian  economy, and many firms in the manufacturing sector are small businesses. To  help small businesses grow and create jobs, the Government has reduced taxes  substantially for small businesses and their owners. This includes both a  reduction in the corporate income tax rate for small businesses to 11 per cent and increases in the amount of annual income eligible for this lower rate  to $500,000. Small business owners are also benefitting from increases to the  Lifetime Capital Gains Exemption.

Economic Action Plan 2015 builds on this  strong foundation by proposing to further reduce the small business tax rate to  9 per cent by 2019 (see Chapter 3.2). This significant tax reduction will further encourage job  creation and economic growth.

For  example, as a result of actions taken by the Government to reduce the small  business tax rate (including this new proposed measure) and increase the amount  of income eligible for that rate, the amount of federal corporate income tax  paid by a small business with $500,000 of taxable income will be 46 per cent  lower in 2019 than in 2006. This represents an annual tax reduction of up  to $38,600 that can be reinvested in the business to fuel its growth.

In recognition of the important    contribution that small businesses across the country make to job creation    and economic growth, in September 2014 the Government announced the Small    Business Job Credit:

The credit will provide relief    to small businesses for Employment Insurance (EI) premiums paid in 2015 and    2016. The credit will be available to any firm paying employer EI premiums    equal to or less than $15,000 in those years.

The credit will effectively    reduce small businesses’ EI premium rate by 28 cents from the legislated    $1.88 rate to $1.60 per $100 of insurable earnings. The credit is calculated    as the difference between premiums paid at the legislated rate and the    reduced small business rate.

The credit is expected to provide    savings of more than $550 million over the next two years for small    businesses. Almost 90 per cent of all EI premium-paying businesses in Canada    will receive the credit, reducing their EI payroll taxes by nearly 15 per    cent.

Expanding Access to Foreign Markets

Access to foreign markets is crucial for Canada’s  manufacturing sector, which accounts for 61 per cent of Canada’s total  merchandise exports. Since 2006, the Government has concluded free trade  agreements with 38 countries, bringing Canada’s total to 43. The past year has  been particularly successful with a number of new trade agreements  completed, including the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade  Agreement and the entry into force of the landmark Canada-Korea Free Trade  Agreement (see Chapter 3.5).

The Government is taking steps to speed up legitimate trade  and travel and align regulatory approaches between Canada and the U.S., which  accounts for nearly 80 per cent of all domestic manufacturing exports, by  launching the Canada-U.S. Action Plan on Perimeter Security and Economic  Competitiveness and the Action Plan on Regulatory Cooperation in 2011 (see Chapter  3.5).

The Government also recognizes that domestic trade barriers  can undermine business productivity and competitiveness. Since 2009, Canada has  unilaterally eliminated more than 1,800 tariffs, providing more than $450 million in annual tariff relief to Canadian manufacturers. This includes the  elimination of all remaining tariffs on imported machinery and equipment and  manufacturing inputs, making Canada a tariff-free zone for industrial  manufacturers (see Chapter 3.1).

In addition, the Government is providing an  unprecedented level of investment in public infrastructure that  facilitates trade and supports the competitiveness of Canadian businesses,  including through the $33 billion 2007 Building Canada Plan and the $53 billion  New Building Canada Plan, as well as projects such as the replacement of the  Champlain Bridge in Montreal and the construction of the Detroit River  International Crossing (see Chapter 4.4).

Economic Action Plan 2015 proposes new initiatives to help  Canadian businesses fully capitalize on emerging global opportunities (see  Chapter 3.5), including:

Providing $50 million over five years, starting  in 2015–16, for a program to share the cost of exploring new export  opportunities with small and medium-sized enterprises.

Providing $42 million over five years, starting  in 2015–16, to expand the footprint and resources of the Trade  Commissioner Service.

Supporting Business Innovation and World-Class Research

Innovation  is becoming increasingly crucial to the success of manufacturers, and requires  a continuous supply of new knowledge and top talent.

The  Government has acted to support innovation across the economy by doubling the  National Research Council’s Industrial Research Assistance Program, with a  further $110 million per year, to better support research and development by  small and medium-sized client firms—about half of which are in the  manufacturing and information and communications technology sectors. It has  also improved assistance through the regional development agencies by refocusing  the Atlantic Innovation Fund and launching the Western Innovation Initiative.

The  Government has nurtured the strategic interactions between research  institutions, researchers and enterprises by enhancing support for business-driven  granting council programs focused on industry-academic collaboration. This is  in addition to continuing to provide stable, long-term funding for  post-secondary research through the granting councils’ core discovery programs,  the Canada Foundation for Innovation and leading not-for-profit organizations  such as Genome Canada.

The Government has also  taken targeted steps to support business innovation in the manufacturing  sector, including:

Allocating $1 billion to the Automotive  Innovation Fund since its creation in 2008, to support significant new  research and development projects and long-term investments.

Announcing stable funding of close to $1 billion  over five years (starting in 2013–14) for the Strategic Aerospace and Defence  Initiative, and launching a new Technology Demonstration Program for the  aerospace sector in 2013.

Establishing the Pulp and Paper Green  Transformation Program in 2009, with $1 billion over three years to  support capital projects in the pulp and paper sector that offer  demonstrable environmental benefits.

Providing over $190 million to the Investments  in Forest Industry Transformation program.

Establishing a new Advanced Manufacturing Fund,  with funding of $200 million over five years, as part of the renewal of  the Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario. The first  recipient under the program, announced in March 2015, is Fibracast (Hamilton,  Ontario), a manufacturer of advanced membrane technologies used in water  and wastewater treatment.

Economic Action Plan 2015 is taking further actions to  foster innovation by manufacturers, including in the automotive, aerospace and  space, and forest sectors. It also includes support for advanced research and  commitments to key international science and technology initiatives that create  significant business opportunities for innovative Canadian firms (see Chapter 3.1), including:

Providing up to $100 million over five years,  starting in 2015–16, to support product development and technology  demonstration by Canadian automotive parts suppliers through the new Automotive  Supplier Innovation Program.

Developing a national aerospace supplier development  initiative modelled on the successful MACH program pioneered by Aéro  Montréal.

Providing an additional $30 million over four  years, starting in 2016–17, to support cutting-edge research and  technology development in Canada’s satellite communications sector.

Continuing to support the transformation of the  forest sector by providing $86 million over two years, starting in  2016–17, to extend the Forest Innovation Program and the Expanding Market  Opportunities Program (see Chapter 3.5).

Providing $119.2 million over two years,  starting in 2015–16, to the National Research Council’s industry-partnered  research and development activities, helping Canadian businesses increase their  competitiveness and develop new, cutting-edge products.

Providing an additional $1.33 billion over six  years, starting in 2017–18, to the Canada Foundation for Innovation to  support advanced research infrastructure at universities, colleges and research  hospitals.

Dedicating an additional $46 million per year to  the granting councils, starting in 2016–17, focused in areas that will fuel  economic growth and respond to important challenges and opportunities.

The federal granting councils offer    a variety of programs that support the development of knowledge and    talent at universities and colleges across Canada, which together    are vital for a growing economy.

This includes the Natural Sciences and    Engineering Research Council’s Strategy for Partnerships and Innovation. Over    the 2009–2014 period, the Council funded more than 13,400 projects connecting    businesses and researchers, with industry contributions increasing from $108 million    to $195 million per year. During this time the number of industry    partners doubled from 1,500 to more than 3,000 annually, of which 75 per cent    are small and medium-sized enterprises.

The Strategy for Partnerships and    Innovation has demonstrated success in helping more businesses extend their    research and development capabilities, showing that Canadian businesses and    academic institutions can help move Canada ahead in the global innovation    race by working together.

Training a Highly Skilled Workforce

In recent years, the Government has taken important steps to  reform the skills training system to better help Canadians acquire the skills  that will get them hired or help them get better jobs. This includes  creating the Canada Job Grant, an innovative, employer-driven approach to help Canadians  gain the skills and training they need to fill available jobs, with up to  $15,000 per person for training costs in partnership with employers.

The Government has also announced the intention to  renegotiate the $1.95‑billion‑per-year Labour Market Development Agreements  with provinces and territories to reorient training towards labour market  demand.

To help more Canadians become apprentices and complete their  training, the Government created the Canada Apprentice Loan to provide  apprentices registered in Red Seal trades with interest-free loans for  training. It is also providing significant financial support to apprentices  through the introduction of the Apprenticeship Incentive Grant and the  Apprenticeship Completion Grant.

Economic Action Plan 2015 proposes to build on these  actions by:

Providing a one-time investment of $65 million to  business and industry associations to allow them to work with willing  post-secondary institutions to better align curricula with the needs of  employers (see Chapter 3.3).

Helping to develop the next generation of research  and development leaders by providing $56.4 million over four years,  starting in 2016–17, to Mitacs in support of graduate-level industrial research  and development internships (see Chapter 3.1).

Through its Accelerate    program, Mitacs is helping Bombardier Aerospace, Bell Helicopter Textron    Canada Limited and Pratt & Whitney Canada with projects on additive manufacturing    processes (also known as 3D printing). The objective of the research initiative    is to advance the development of selected parts for aircraft and helicopter    structures as well as aircraft engines, and pave the way for usage of    additive manufacturing techniques in the production of parts for repair,    retrofit or new product development.

Nuance Communications, a    multinational leader in voice and language solutions, collaborated with    Mitacs Accelerate interns at McGill University on a long-term research    project related to speech recognition technologies for mobile applications.    The interns each worked on different aspects of the project,    such as adapting applications to a user’s voice in dictation, and    natural language understanding.

Creating Business Opportunities Through Government Procurement

Federal procurement  represents a huge market for businesses large and small. The Government is  strategically using procurement to contribute to the viability and growth  of innovative Canadian businesses.

The  Government pursued this approach through its $35 billion National Shipbuilding  Procurement Strategy, a long-term commitment to generate high-value jobs  through the manufacturing of new vessels for the Royal Canadian Navy and the  Canadian Coast Guard at Canadian shipyards in Halifax and Vancouver. More  broadly, the Government announced in February 2014 the implementation of the  Defence Procurement Strategy to ensure that defence procurement delivers the  right equipment to the Canadian Armed Forces and generates economic benefits  and jobs for Canadians. In addition, the Government made permanent the Build in  Canada Innovation Program and added a military component to provide small and  medium-sized businesses an opportunity to showcase their innovative goods and  services within federal departments before taking them to market.

Economic Action Plan 2015 proposes to build upon this  foundation by:

Providing $2.5 million per year, starting in  2016–17, to Industry Canada to increase the analytical capacity needed to  support the Defence Procurement Strategy, by providing expert data analysis and  research on the key industrial capabilities within Canada’s defence industrial  base (see Chapter 3.1).

In 2015, construction will    begin at Irving Shipbuilding Inc. in Halifax, Nova Scotia, on the first    of six Arctic Offshore Patrol Ships for the Royal Canadian Navy. Construction    of the ships will sustain approximately 1,000 jobs at Irving Shipbuilding    Inc. as well as many jobs at suppliers across Canada. For example, the    majority of the steel plate for the first ship will be produced at the Essar    Steel Algoma rolling mill in Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario.

Vancouver Shipyards has    completed investments to modernize its shipyard for building non-combat ships    under the National Shipbuilding Procurement Strategy, and construction of the    two initial blocks for the Canadian Coast Guard’s Offshore Fisheries Science    Vessels began in October 2014. Vancouver Shipyards has awarded over $120 million in contracts to Canadian suppliers, and more than 100 companies have    been engaged.

Conclusion

The Government’s commitment to support the competitiveness  of Canadian manufacturers is longstanding and strong, reflecting the importance  of the manufacturing sector to a vibrant and innovative economy. Actions to  date, supplemented by significant new tax relief and investments in Economic  Action Plan 2015, will help to fuel the success of manufacturing firms in  global markets both today and in the years to come.



<<< source: anx4-eng.html >>>

Annex 4 - Debt Management Strategy for 2015–16

Highlights

The debt  program for 2015–16 is consistent with the Government’s medium‑term debt  strategy and maintains the focus on stability and the reduction of  financial risk.

Gross bond  issuance is expected to be $90 billion in 2015–16 and stabilize around $98  billion over the medium term. At the end of 2015–16, the stock of marketable  bonds is projected to be about $507 billion.

The Government  will cease issuing 3-year bonds starting in 2015–16. This will allow for the  building of larger benchmark sizes in the core 2- and 5-year sectors, which  will increase liquidity and support the well-functioning of these  important sectors.

The stock  of treasury bills is projected to decrease from $136 billion at the start of  this fiscal year to $129 billion by the end of 2015–16.

In 2014, the Government issued 50-year bonds for  the first time. With a total of $3.5 billion issued through syndication, these  bonds were well received by investors and contributed to a reduction in  refinancing risk at a low cost. Given  the strong demand for long-term bonds and with long-term yields remaining well  below their historical average, additional 50-year bonds may be issued in  2015–16, subject to favourable  market conditions.

Introduction

The Debt Management  Strategy sets out the Government of Canada’s objectives, strategy and plans  for the management of its domestic and foreign debt, other financial  liabilities and related assets. Borrowing activities support the ongoing  refinancing of government debt coming to maturity, the execution of the budget  plan and the financial operations of the Government. This includes investing in  financial assets needed to establish a prudent liquidity position and borrowing  on behalf of certain Crown corporations.

The Financial Administration Act requires that the Government  table in Parliament, prior to the start of the fiscal year, a report  on the anticipated borrowing to be undertaken in the year ahead, including the  purposes for which the money will be borrowed. As such, the Minister of Finance  tabled the Debt Management  Strategy for 2015–16 in Parliament on March 30, 2015.

The Debt Management Strategy for 2015–16 is being updated in the  context of Economic Action Plan 2015 to reflect the latest fiscal and financial  projections. The March 30, 2015 version of the Debt Management Strategy for 2015–16 was  based on the previous fiscal and financial projections associated with the Update of Economic and Fiscal  Projections released on November 12, 2014. The infrastructure package  announced in November 2014 was also included in the baseline.

Planned Borrowing Activities for 2015–16

Borrowing Authority

Theaggregate borrowing limit  approved by the Governor in Council to meet projected financial requirements in 2015–16  and provide a margin for prudence is $270 billion,  which is unchanged from 2014–15 and $30 billion lower than in 2013–14.

Actual borrowings and uses of funds compared with those  forecast will be reported in the 2015–16 Debt  Management Report , and detailed information on outcomes will be provided in  the 2016 Public Accounts of Canada .  Both documents will be tabled in Parliament in the fall of 2016.

Sources of Borrowings

The aggregate principal amount of money to be borrowed  by the Government from financial markets in 2015–16 is projected to  be $231 billion.

Uses of Borrowings

Refinancing Needs

Refinancing needs,  projected to be $212 billion during the year, are mainly comprised of $136  billion for maturing treasury bills and $70 billion for maturing bonds.

Financial Source/Requirement

The other main  determinant of borrowing needs is the Government’s financial  source/requirement. If the Government has a financial source, it can use  the source for some of its refinancing needs. If it has a financial  requirement, then it must meet that requirement along with its  refinancing needs.

The financial  source/requirement measures the difference between cash coming  into the Government and cash going out. This measure is affected not only  by the budgetary balance but also by the Government’s non-budgetary  transactions.

Non-budgetary transactions include changes in federal  employee pension accounts; changes in non-financial assets; investing  activities through loans, investments and advances (including loans to three  Crown corporations—the Business Development Bank of Canada, Farm Credit  Canada and Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation); and other transactions (e.g., changes  in other financial assets and liabilities, and foreign exchange  activities).

For 2015–16, a financial requirement  of approximately $14 billion is projected. As the amount the Government plans to borrow  is higher than borrowing requirements, the year-end cash position is projected  to increase by about $5 billion (Table A4.1) to accommodate  collateral management in support of cross-currency swap activities that fund  assets in the Exchange Fund Account (EFA).

Actual  borrowings for the year may differ from the forecast due to uncertainty  associated with economic and fiscal projections, the timing of cash  transactions and other factors,  such as changes in foreign reserve needs and Crown borrowings.  Therefore, the aggregate borrowing limit of $270 billion for 2015–16 includes a  margin for prudence, enabling debt management operations to respond to changing  circumstances without the need for frequent resubmissions to the Governor  in Council.

Debt Management Strategy for  2015–16

Objectives

The fundamental  objective of debt management is to raise stable and low‑cost funding to meet  the financial needs of the Government of Canada. An associated objective  is to maintain a well-functioning market in Government of Canada  securities, which helps to keep debt costs low and stable.

Raising Stable Low-Cost Funding

Achieving stable low-cost funding involves striking a  balance between the cost and the risk associated with the debt  structure.

Over the medium term, debt management decisions will be  taken with a view to keeping debt costs low and maintaining risks at  prudent levels, while reserving sufficient flexibility to adapt to changing  circumstances.

Maintaining a Well-Functioning Government  Securities Market

Having access to a  well-functioning government securities market ensures that funding can be  raised efficiently to meet the Government’s needs regardless of economic  conditions. To support a liquid and well-functioning Government of Canada  securities market, the Government strives to maintain transparent,  regular and diversified borrowing programs.

Continued Strong Demand for Government of Canada  Debt Securities

Among global investors, Canada has a well-earned reputation  for responsible fiscal, economic and financial sector management. The major  credit rating agencies have again accorded Canada the highest possible credit rating  with a stable outlook, a position shared by very few countries. This  position of strength has supported healthy ongoing demand for Government of  Canada securities, making them among the world’s most sought-after investments.

Canada

Australia

Denmark

Germany

Luxembourg

Norway

Singapore

Sweden

Switzerland

Market Consultations

As in previous  years, market participants were consulted periodically in 2014–15 as part of  the process of developing the debt management strategy. The most recent  set of consultations were held in November 2014 and were focused  on obtaining feedback on a broad range of topics associated with  the functioning of the Government of Canada treasury bill and bond markets  as well as the terms of participation governing Government of Canada  securities auctions.

Further details on  the subjects of discussion and the views expressed during the consultations  can be found on the Bank of Canada website .

Medium-Term Debt Strategy

The Government’s medium-term debt strategy serves as the fundamental  building block for the annual debt management strategy and is informed by  modelling analysis that reflects a  wide range of economic and interest rate scenarios drawn from historical  experience. The medium-term debt strategy is aimed at gradually transitioning the debt structure towards a  more even distribution across maturity sectors (Chart A4.1), while improving  cost-risk characteristics over time. Specifically, it seeks to strike a balance  between keeping funding costs low and mitigating risks to the Government, as  measured by metrics such as debt rollover, the variation in annual debt-service  charges and the variation in the annual budgetary balance.

Over the medium term the share of bonds with original terms of 10 years or more is projected  to remain around 43 per cent. The  level of refinancing risk of domestic market debt is projected to decline over  the medium term. The net annual refixing amount of domestic market debt as  a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP), which measures the amount of all  domestic market debt that matures within one year relative to Canada’s GDP, is  projected to decline from about 7 per cent in 2015–16 to  approximately 5 per cent over the medium term (Chart A4.2).

The average term to  maturity of domestic market debt, net of financial assets, is projected to  remain relatively stable around 7.5 to 8 years over the medium term (Chart  A4.3).

Composition of Market Debt

Total market debt  is projected to be $668 billion by the end of 2015–16 (Table A4.2),  reflecting higher year-end cash balances, significant cash outlays on federal  infrastructure, borrowings of Crown corporations, and the requirements  associated with increasing international reserves.

Debt management strategy decisions taken over the past few  years have been aimed at gradually transitioning the debt structure towards a  more even distribution across maturity sectors, consistent with the medium-term  debt strategy.

The projected  decline in the stock of treasury bills, from about $136 billion at the  start of the fiscal year to approximately $129 billion by the end of 2015–16,  continues to be an effective means to improve refinancing and rollover  risks.

Bond Program

In 2015–16, gross bond issuance  is expected to be $90 billion, representing a decrease of about $9 billion from  2014–15 levels (Table A4.3).

Gross bond issuance net of buybacks and maturities, or the net new  supply of bonds, will increase in 2015–16 (Chart A4.4). Over the medium term, annual gross bond  issuance is projected to stabilize around $98 billion.

Issuance in the 3-year sector was reintroduced in 2009 in  light of significantly higher financial requirements associated with the  Extraordinary Financing Framework and the stimulus phase of Canada’s Economic  Action Plan.

While auctions for 3-year bonds perform well, the 3-year sector is not  a core component of the Government’s debt mix (i.e., 2-, 5-, 10- and 30-year  nominal bonds). In this regard, market participants have expressed a preference  for the cessation of issuance in the 3-year sector in favour of increased  issuance in other sectors, specifically 2- and 5-year bonds.

Consistent  with the feedback received, there will be no issuance in the 3-year sector in  2015–16. The forgone issuance will be  gradually reallocated to the 2- and 5-year sectors. Ceasing issuance in the  3-year sector will allow for the building of larger benchmark sizes in the core  2- and 5-year sectors, which will increase liquidity and support the  well-functioning of these important sectors.

Given the  strong demand for long-term bonds and with long-term yields remaining well  below their historical average, additional 50-year bonds may be issued in 2015–16. Any decision to reopen the ultra-long  bond would be subject to favourable market conditions and would be communicated  by the Government to market participants during the course of the fiscal year.

Maturity Dates and Benchmark Bond Target  Range Sizes

The bond issuance pattern for 2014–15 had a total of eight maturity dates,  with the 2- and 3-year sectors sharing two maturity dates: February 1  and August 1 (Table A4.4).

Ceasing issuance in the  3-year sector will not change the number and pattern of maturity dates but will  allow for the building of larger bond benchmarks in the 2- and 5-year sectors. The benchmark bond target range size will be $10 billion  to $14 billion for the 2-, 5- and 10-year sectors, and it will be $10  billion to $16 billion for the 30-year and Real Return Bond sectors (Table  A4.5). Due to  the fungibility with outstanding 3-year bonds, issuance in the fungible 2-year  August 1, 2017 and February 1, 2018 bonds may be smaller than the  non-fungible 2-year November 1, 2017 and May 1, 2018 bonds.

Bond Auction Schedule

In 2015–16, there  will be quarterly auctions of 2-, 5- and 10-year bonds and Real Return Bonds.  To accommodate the cessation of 3-year bond auctions in 2015–16, the number of  auctions for 2- and 5-year bonds will increase. For instance, there will be  four auctions for non-fungible 2-year bonds and two auctions per quarter  for 5-year bonds. Each quarter will feature one 10-year auction in  2015–16.                     Two 30-year nominal bond auctions will occur—one in each of the first and  third quarters of 2015–16.

The order of bond  auctions within each quarter may be adjusted to support the borrowing program,  and there may be multiple auctions of the same bonds in some quarters. The dates of each auction  will continue to be announced  through the Quarterly Bond Schedule that is published on the Bank of  Canada website prior to the start of each quarter.

Bond Buyback Programs

Two types of bond  buyback operations will be conducted in 2015–16: regular bond buybacks on  a switch basis and cash management  bond buybacks.

Buyback operations on a switch basis will be continued in  the 30-year sector and will be conducted in the second quarter of 2015–16. No  regular buyback operations on a cash basis are planned for 2015–16. 1

Weekly cash  management bond buyback operations will be continued in 2015–16. The  cash management bond buyback program helps to manage government cash  requirements by reducing the high levels of cash balances needed ahead of  large bond maturities.

Treasury Bill Program

Over the  course of 2015–16, the share of treasury bills is projected to fall from about  22 per cent to just over 20 per cent of domestic market debt. This  decline is consistent with the medium-term debt strategy, which has a treasury  bill target share of around 20 per cent, and maintains issuance stability in  the bond program.

In  accordance with this plan, the stock of treasury bills is projected to decrease  from $136 billion at start of this fiscal year to $129 billion by the end of  2015–16.

Bi-weekly issuance  of 3-, 6- and 12-month maturities will be continued in 2015–16,  with bi-weekly auction sizes projected to be largely in the $8 billion to $12  billion range (Chart A4.5). Cash management bills (i.e., short-dated treasury  bills) help manage government cash requirements in an efficient manner. These  instruments will also continue to be used in 2015–16.

Prudential Liquidity and Cash Management

Prudential Liquidity

The Government  holds liquid financial assets in the form of domestic cash deposits and  foreign exchange reserves to safeguard its ability to meet payment obligations  in situations where normal access to funding markets may be disrupted or  delayed. This also supports investor confidence in Canadian government debt.

The Government’s  overall liquidity levels cover at least one month of net projected cash flows,  including coupon payments and debt refinancing needs.

Cash Management

The Bank  of Canada, as fiscal agent for the Government, manages the Receiver General  Consolidated Revenue Fund, from which the balances required for the  Government’s day-to-day operations are drawn. The core objective of cash  management is to ensure that the Government has sufficient cash available at  all times to meet its operating requirements.

Cash consists of moneys on deposit with the Bank of  Canada, chartered banks and other financial institutions. Cash with the Bank of  Canada includes operational balances and balances held for the prudential  liquidity plan. Cash balances are projected to increase to $33 billion at March  31, 2016 to accommodate additional cash balances needed for collateral  management in support of cross-currency swap activities that fund assets in the  Exchange Fund Account (Table A4.6). Periodic  updates on the liquidity position are available in The Fiscal Monitor .

Retail Debt

Around 2.5 million Canadians hold Canada Savings Bonds  (CSBs) or Canada Premium Bonds (CPBs). CSBs are offered exclusively  through the Payroll Savings Program while CPBs are available for sale through  financial institutions and dealers. Investors repeatedly cite the safety and  security of CSBs and CPBs as key attributes, with payroll deduction providing a  convenient, simple and free automatic savings option.

Further information on the retail debt program is available  on the Canada Savings Bonds website .

Foreign Currency Funding

The  purpose of the EFA is to aid in the control and protection of the external  value of the Canadian dollar. Assets held in the EFA are managed to  provide foreign currency liquidity, support market confidence, and promote  orderly conditions for the Canadian dollar in the foreign exchange  markets, if required. Liquid foreign exchange reserves are maintained at a  level at or above 3 per cent of nominal  GDP, consistent with the Government’s prudential liquidity plan.

The Government plans to  fund the purchase of foreign currency assets through multiple sources. These  include a short-term US-dollar paper program (Canada bills), medium-term notes,  international bond issues (global bonds), purchases and sales of Canadian  dollars in foreign exchange markets, and cross-currency swaps involving the  exchange of domestic liabilities for foreign-currency-denominated liabilities.  Foreign currency funding requirements for 2015–16 are estimated to be around US$9 billion, but may  vary as a result of movements in foreign interest and exchange rates.

The Debt Management Strategy for 2015 – 16 assumes that all foreign liabilities maturing during the year will be  refinanced. The mix of funding sources used to finance the reserves  in 2015–16 will depend on a number of considerations,  including relative cost, market conditions and the objective of  maintaining a prudent foreign-currency-denominated debt maturity structure.

Further  information on foreign currency funding and the foreign reserve assets is  available in the Report on the Management of Canada’s Official International  Reserves and in The Fiscal Monitor .

Information on Government of Canada Domestic Debt  Securities

Information  regarding outstanding Government of Canada domestic marketable debt securities is available on the Bank of Canada website. The legal terms and conditions for  Canada’s domestic marketable debt securities are posted on the Department of  Finance website.

1 Bond buyback operations on a  cash basis and on a switch basis involve the purchase of bonds with a remaining  term to maturity of 12 months to 25 years. Bond buyback operations on a  cash basis involve the exchange of a bond for cash. Bond buyback operations on  a switch basis involve the exchange of one bond for another, on a  duration-neutral basis (e.g., an off-the-run bond for the building  benchmark bond).
