<<< source: home-accueil-en.html >>>

Archived - Equality + Growth: A Strong Middle Class



<<< source: toc-tdm-en.html >>>

Budget Plan

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

Table of Contents

Growth More Help for the Middle Class and People Working Hard to Join It Introducing the Canada Workers Benefit Strengthening the Canada Child Benefit Enhancing the Wage Earner Protection Program A More Secure Retirement Building More Rental Housing for Canadian Families Equality in the Workforce Addressing the Gender Wage Gap Supporting Community Women’s Organizations A National Conversation on Gender Equality With Young Canadians Engaging Men and Boys to Promote Gender Equality Evidence-Based Policy Skills for Tomorrow’s Economy Canada Summer Jobs 2019–20 Improving the Quality of Career Information and Program Results Making Employment Insurance More Responsive and Effective Improving Access to the Canada Learning Bond Labour Market Transfer Agreements Progress on Lifelong Learning Helping Women Enter and Succeed in the Trades Pre-Apprenticeship Program Getting Into and Staying in the Workforce and Career Pathways for Visible Minority Newcomer Women in Canada Helping Vulnerable People Access Government Funding Investing in Skills for the Future Strengthening and Diversifying Trade Modernizing the North American Free Trade Agreement Pursuing New Markets Ensuring Rules-Based and Responsible Trade A Fair Tax System for All Canadians Cracking Down on Tax Evasion and Combatting Tax Avoidance Combatting Aggressive International Tax Avoidance Holding Passive Investments Inside a Private Corporation Closing Tax Loopholes

Progress Canadians are innovators Canada’s Innovation and Skills Plan Investing in Canadian Scientists and Researchers Supporting the Next Generation of Research and Researchers Granting Councils Canada Research Chairs Research Support Investing in the Equipment Researchers Need—Canada Foundation for Innovation Harnessing Big Data Leveraging the Full Potential of Business-Academia Collaboration Stronger and More Collaborative Federal Science Innovation and Skills Plan—A More Client-Focused Federal Partner for Business Innovation Canada – Accelerated Growth Service The Creation of Four Flagship Platforms Placing Evidence at the Centre of Program Evaluation and Design Expanding Access to Entrepreneurship in Canada Making it Easier for Entrepreneurs and Companies to Do Business Supporting the Rural Economy

Reconciliation Achieving Better Results for Indigenous Peoples Ensuring That Indigenous Children Are Safe and Supported Within Their Communities Clean and Safe Drinking Water on Reserve Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program Support for Distinctions-Based Housing Strategies Indigenous Health: Keeping Families Healthy in Their Communities Supporting Inuit Priorities Supporting Métis Nation Priorities Increased Health Supports for Survivors of Indian Residential Schools and Their Families Supporting the Gord Downie & Chanie Wenjack Fund Creating a More Responsive Income Assistance Program That Addresses the Needs of First Nations Communities Supporting Indigenous History and Heritage Indigenous Sport Supporting the Expansion of the First Nations Land Management Act and the Successful Participation of First Nations Under the Act Renewing the Matrimonial Real Property Implementation Support Program Rights and Self-Determination Supporting the Recognition and Implementation of Rights and Self-Determination Helping Indigenous Nations Reconstitute Permanent Bilateral Mechanisms New Fiscal Relationship: Strengthening First Nations Institutions and Community Capacity New Fiscal Relationship: Collaborating With Self-Governing Indigenous Governments Strengthening Indigenous Data and Research Capability

Advancement Part 1: Canada’s Natural Legacy A Clean Environment for Future Generations Protecting Canada’s Nature, Parks and Wild Spaces Protecting Marine Life Establishing Better Rules to Protect the Environment and Grow the Economy Pricing Carbon Pollution and Supporting Clean Growth Adapting Canada’s Weather and Water Services to Climate Change Extending Tax Support for Clean Energy Part 2: Canada and the World Advancing Gender Equality Around the World Enhancing Transparency in Canada’s International Assistance Programming Implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Part 3: Upholding Shared Values Supporting the Health and Wellness of Canadians Taking Action to Reduce Smoking Cannabis Taxation, Regulation and Public Protection: Legalizing Cannabis in 2018 Support for Canada’s Veterans Supporting Canada’s Heritage and Cultural Diversity Good Governance Improving Service Delivery Part 4: Security and Access to Justice Access to Justice Combatting Gender-Based Violence and Harassment Addressing Corporate Integrity A Strong Sanctions Regime Ensuring Security and Prosperity in the Digital Age Enabling Digital Services to Canadians Enhancing the Security of Taxpayer Information Investment Canada Act—National Security Review of Foreign Investments Safeguarding the Integrity of Our Public Safety System Supporting Those Who Keep Our Communities Safe Further Improving Mental Health Supports for Inmates Reopening the Penitentiary Farms at Joyceville and Collins Bay Institutions Borders and Migration

Equality Budget 2018’s Gender Results Framework Canada’s Commitment to Gender Budgeting Canada’s Gender Results Framework Gender Equality Goals for Canada Education and Skills Development Economic Participation and Prosperity Leadership and Democratic Participation Gender-Based Violence and Access to Justice Poverty Reduction, Health and Well-Being Gender Equality Around the World GBA+ of Budget 2018 Strengthening Support for Low-Income Canadians Helping Working Canadians Supporting the Next Generation of Research and Researchers Innovation and Skills Plan—A More Client-Focused Federal Partner for Business Advancing Reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples A Clean Environment for Future Generations Supporting the Health and Well Being of Canadians Ensuring Security and Prosperity Access to Justice Improving Service Delivery

Annex 1 - Economic and Fiscal Outlook Introduction Canadian Economic Developments Unemployment Rate Near its Lowest Level in Four Decades Earnings and Confidence Are Expected to Continue to Underpin Growth Labour Market Slack Remains in Some Provincial Economies Recent Indicators Point to Ongoing Business Investment Gains Export Growth Is Anticipated to Rise Crude Oil Prices Have Increased, but the Discount on Canadian Oil Has Also Risen Housing Market Pressures Easing Global Economic Developments Global Economic Activity Is Firming Global Financial Conditions Remain Supportive Despite a Recent Pullback in Equities The U.S. Economy Is Operating at Potential European Economies Surprised on the Upside in 2017 Strong Growth in China and Emerging Economies Budget 2018 Economic Outlook Risk Assessment Budget 2018 Fiscal Outlook Continued Investments in a Strong Middle Class A Downward Deficit and Debt Ratio Track Continued Economic Strength Would Accelerate Deficit Reduction

Annex 2 - Details of Economic and Fiscal Projections Contents 1. Private Sector Economic Projections 2. Economic and Fiscal Developments and Policy Actions since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement 2.1 Impact of Economic and Fiscal Developments since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement 2.2 Policy Actions Announced since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement 2.3 Other Budget 2018 Measures (Not Included in Previous Chapters) 3. Fiscal Projections 3.1 Summary Statement of Transactions 3.2 Outlook for Budgetary Revenues 3.3 Outlook for Program Expenses 3.4 Financial Source/Requirement 4. Supplementary Information 4.1 Policy Actions and Budget Investments by Department (Cash Basis) 4.2 Reconciliation of Budget 2018 Expenses with 2018–19 Planned Estimates 4.3 Sensitivity of Fiscal Projections to Economic Shocks 4.4 Update on Allocation of Infrastructure Investments

Annex 3 - Strengthening and Modernizing Canada’s Financial Sector Ensuring a Safe and Sound Financial System Modernizing the Deposit Insurance Framework Financial Market Infrastructure Resolution Maintaining a Robust Currency Regime Fostering Innovation and Competition Review of Open Banking Supporting an Innovative Retail Payments System Modernizing the Financial Sector Framework Enhancing Consumer Protection in Banking Treasury Management

Debt Management Strategy for 2018–19 Introduction Outlook for Government of Canada Debt Planned Borrowing Activities for 2018–19 Borrowing Authority Sources of Borrowings Use of Borrowings Debt Management Strategy for 2018–19 Objectives Debt Structure Planning Market Consultations Composition of Market Debt 2018–19 Treasury Bill Program 2018–19 Bond Program Management of Canada’s Official International Reserves Cash Management Prudential Liquidity

Tax Measures: Supplementary Information



<<< source: growth-croissance-en.html >>>

Equality + Growth

Canada’s greatest strength is the diversity of our people. To succeed in a rapidly changing world, our diversity needs to be reflected in our economy, giving every Canadian a real and fair chance at success. Although Canadian women today are among the best educated in the world, they earn less than men, are less likely to participate in the labour market than men, and are more likely to work part time.

Closing these gaps and giving women equal opportunities to succeed won’t just ensure strong economic growth—it will also encourage a more inclusive dialogue on the questions that will shape our future, and improve the quality of life of our families and communities. Simply put, when women have the support and opportunities to fully contribute to Canada’s economy, the entire economy does better.

In Budget 2018, the Government is taking the next steps in its plan to create good, well-paying jobs, strengthen the middle class, and grow the economy. By promoting equality, providing greater opportunity for people working hard to succeed, equipping Canadians with the skills for tomorrow’s economy, and promoting fundamental fairness for all Canadians, the Government is empowering everyone—women and men in all their diversity—to help build a stronger Canada that benefits us all.

MEASURES

Because of the hard work, ingenuity and creativity of Canadians, unemployment is nearing record lows, the economy has created nearly 600,000 new jobs over the last two years, and last year Canada led the Group of Seven (G7) countries in economic growth. Through Budget 2018, the Government is building on this achievement with concrete measures that will create an even stronger economy—one where all Canadians have the opportunity to succeed and make the most of their talents.

More Support for People Who Need It

Introducing the New Canada Workers Benefit

Canadians working hard to join the middle class deserve to have their hard work rewarded with greater opportunities for success. In Budget 2018, the Government is introducing the new Canada Workers Benefit (CWB), a tax benefit that will allow low-income workers to keep more of their paycheque. Building on the former Working Income Tax Benefit, the new CWB will encourage more people to join the workforce, and offer real help to more than two million Canadians who are working hard to join the middle class, raising around 70,000 Canadians out of poverty. Starting in 2019, the CWB will increase both maximum benefits and the income level at which the benefit is phased out. As a result, a low-income worker earning $15,000 would receive up to almost $500 more from the CWB in 2019 than in 2018 to invest in the things that are important to them. Everyone who can benefit from the new CWB will benefit when they file their taxes. As a result, an estimated 300,000 additional low-income workers will receive the new CWB for the 2019 tax year. Combined with previous enhancements, the Government is investing almost $1 billion in new funding per year in helping low-income workers get ahead.

Strengthening the Canada Child Benefit

By giving more help to the families that need it most, including a large number of families led by single mothers, the Canada Child Benefit (CCB) is helping them invest in the things that give children a good start in life—like a safe place to live, healthy food, music lessons or sports camps. Over 3.3 million families are receiving more than $23 billion in annual CCB payments. A single mom of two children aged 5 and 8 with a net income of $35,000 in 2016 is receiving $11,125 in tax-free CCB payments in the 2017–18 benefit year—$3,535 more than she would have received under the previous child benefit system. Overall, single mothers are receiving roughly $1.8 billion more in benefits annually under the CCB. With this support, the CCB has helped lift hundreds of thousands of children out of poverty. As announced in the 2017 Fall Economic Statement, the Government will strengthen the CCB to make sure it keeps up with the rising cost of living, starting in July 2018.

Improving Access to the Canada Child Benefit and Other Benefits for Indigenous Communities

Through Budget 2018, the Government is taking action to help ensure that everyone who qualifies for support receives it. The Government recognizes that Indigenous communities—and in particular remote and northern Indigenous communities—face distinct barriers to accessing federal benefits such as the CCB. To close this gap, with Budget 2018 the Government will expand outreach efforts to all on-reserve, remote and northern Indigenous communities, and pilot outreach activities for urban Indigenous communities, so that Indigenous Peoples are better able to access the full range of federal social benefits, including the CCB.

Addressing the Gender Wage Gap

Today, women earn 31 per cent less than men on an annual basis, and on average about 12 per cent less in the hourly wage paid for full-time work. Studies show that by closing the wage gap between women and men, Canada’s economic growth would jump significantly. Through Budget 2018, the Government of Canada is leading by example and putting in place measures to address the gender wage gap by shining a light on pay practices in the federally regulated sector and moving forward with a proactive pay equity regime that will be tabled later this fall. This robust pay equity regime will cover businesses and organizations operating within the federally regulated sector, applying to around 1.2 million individuals. It will include strong oversight and enforcement, require regular maintenance, and take an innovative approach to ensure that on average, women and men receive the same pay for work of equal value.

A New Parental Sharing Benefit

For many Canadians, being a parent and raising a family is the most important part of their lives. Employment Insurance (EI) maternity and parental benefits offer vital income support to parents during the critical period in early childhood when they need to take time off work to care for their children. Through Budget 2018, the Government is proposing a new EI Parental Sharing Benefit to support equality in the home and the workplace by providing an additional five weeks of benefits when both parents agree to share parental leave. This measure would also provide greater flexibility— particularly for mothers—to return to work sooner, if they so choose, knowing their family has the support they need.

A New Gender Results Framework

To better support equality of opportunity, the Government is introducing a new Gender Results Framework to guide future decision-making and to measure our progress in fostering an economy that works for everyone. The Framework has shaped a broad package of new investments in Budget 2018 that better support women and girls, remove barriers to their success and empower them with the skills, education and resources to fully realize their potential.

Skills for Tomorrow’s Economy

Canadians are adapting to our rapidly evolving economy by embracing learning as a lifelong commitment. The Government is supporting their efforts by ensuring they have the resources they need to prepare for, find and keep good jobs. Through Budget 2018, the Government is doubling the work placements for youth through the Canada Summer Jobs program in 2019–20, providing new funding to modernize the Youth Employment Strategy, and introducing a new Apprenticeship Incentive Grant for Women, a five-year pilot project providing up to $6,000 over two years to women entering male-dominated Red Seal trades. This, in combination with the Apprenticeship Completion Grant, will provide up to $8,000 to women completing their apprenticeship training in those often better-paid trades. Underrepresented groups, including women, Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities, members of visible minorities and newcomers, would also benefit from a new Pre-Apprenticeship Program that would help them explore the trades, gain work experience, make informed career choices and develop the skills needed to succeed.

Making Employment Insurance More Responsive and Effective

The Employment Insurance (EI) program is an important source of support for Canadian workers, providing temporary income to people who have lost their job or have to be absent from work for an extended period of time. In addition to the new EI Parental Sharing Benefit, Budget 2018 proposes a number of measures to ensure EI is there to help Canadians when they need it most. The Government will extend Working While on Claim provisions to maternity and sickness benefits so that mothers and those dealing with an illness or injury have greater flexibility to stage their return to work and keep more of their EI benefits. The Government will also work with key provinces to help workers in seasonal industries most affected by fluctuations in eligibility for EI from year to year and who are unable to find alternative employment in between seasons. This will take the form of both short-term support starting in 2017–18, as well as pilot projects that will be developed and implemented in partnership with provinces over the next two years.

Enhancing Tax Fairness

A fair tax system is the foundation for a stronger middle class and a growing economy, giving Canadians the confidence that their hard work will be rewarded and supporting investments in new and better opportunities that benefit everyone. The Government has taken decisive action towards a fairer tax system by raising taxes on the wealthiest one per cent while cutting taxes for the middle class, providing nine million Canadians with more money to save or spend on things they need. At the same time, Budget 2018 continues to advance efforts to crack down on overseas tax evasion.

Supporting Small Businesses While Ensuring Tax Fairness

Canadian small businesses have more money to invest and grow thanks to the Government’s proposed reduction of the small business tax rate to 10 per cent, effective January 1, 2018, and to 9 per cent, effective January 1, 2019. This tax reduction will provide businesses with more money to invest, grow and create jobs. Budget 2018 takes the next steps to ensure that the low rate is working to help businesses grow, not give a tax advantage to a very small number of wealthy Canadians.

Strengthening Trade

Middle class growth and economic success depend not only on the hard work of Canadians, but also on the opportunities created by strengthening our trade connections in an increasingly globalized world. Through Budget 2018, the Government is committed to deepening Canada’s trade relationships with modern, progressive free trade agreements, including a firm commitment to advancing a new and modernized North American Free Trade Agreement, maximizing new opportunities offered by the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, the signing of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership, and the pursuit of new relationships with other large and emerging markets.

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.



<<< source: progress-progres-en.html >>>

Progress: Supporting Canada’s Researchers to Build a More Innovative Economy

Next Steps in the Innovation and Skills Plan

The world is shifting to a knowledge-based global economy, driven by the creation of ideas and their translation into commercial value.

To support this transformation, the Government is making historic investments through Budget 2018 to support the next generation of researchers, and providing researchers with the cutting-edge equipment needed to make scientific breakthroughs and drive innovation. This includes strengthening scientific research in Canada in a way that reflects our diversity, including support for the next generation of women, members of visible minorities and Indigenous researchers.

Building on its Innovation and Skills Plan, the Government is transforming and re-tooling Canada’s innovation programs, rules and regulations to better support Canada’s innovators.

MEASURES

Investing in Canadian Researchers

We have always understood that better is possible, and time after time we have used curiosity, courage, creativity and collaboration to create positive change for ourselves—and the world. But progress does not happen without commitment and effort. Since the release of the recommendations of the Fundamental Science Review, the Government has heard the strong and united message from Canada’s research community on the importance of investing in the future of Canadian research. With Budget 2018, the Government of Canada is making significant new investments to support Canada’s researchers and innovators. These investments are not simply to enhance the status quo. In recognition of the historic opportunity for real change, investments made though Budget 2018 will be tied to clear objectives and conditions so that Canada’s next generation of researchers is larger, more diverse and better supported.

Granting Councils

Canada’s three granting councils are arm’s-length organizations that provide federal funding for the work of researchers at post-secondary institutions and research hospitals. In Budget 2018, the Government is proposing a historic investment to support this work—the largest amount of new funding for fundamental research through the granting councils in decades. This will provide increased support and training opportunities for about 21,000 researchers, students and high-quality personnel across Canada.

Canada Research Chairs

To attract and retain leading researchers at post-secondary institutions across the country, the Government is proposing new funding for the Canada Research Chairs program. This funding will provide more flexibility to improve the program so that it better meets researchers’ priorities. The investment will support early-career researchers, while increasing diversity, including increasing the number of women who are nominated for Canada Research Chairs.

Supporting Colleges and Polytechnics

Colleges and polytechnics actively collaborate with small and medium-sized businesses in their communities to solve business challenges. Through Budget 2018, the Government will increase support for collaborative innovation projects involving businesses, colleges and polytechnics through the College and Community Innovation Program.

Investing in the Equipment Researchers Need

To ensure that Canada’s researchers have the tools they need to make scientific breakthroughs and drive innovation, the Government is taking a significant step to provide ongoing, stable funding to the Canada Foundation for Innovation with investments in research infrastructure. Better equipment and laboratories will allow Canadian researchers to make discoveries in areas like new composite materials for jets and cars, new diagnostic techniques for childhood diseases, and new methods for cracking the quantum computing challenge. This will include support for national science facilities that make international-calibre research possible in Canada.

Big Data

Big data has become an essential tool for scientific progress, underpinning world-class research across all disciplines. It provides the information that can lead to new ways of addressing scientific challenges like medical researchers in genomics using advanced research computing to analyze genetic sequences to look for DNA-related changes that might cause cancer or dementia. Through Budget 2018, the Government is providing funding in support of a Digital Research Infrastructure Strategy to deliver more open and equitable access to advanced computing and big data resources for researchers across Canada.

Stronger and More Collaborative Federal Science

Helping Businesses and Academics Work Together

The National Research Council’s (NRC’s) world-class scientists help advance Canadian businesses through cutting-edge innovation and reinforce Canada’s research capabilities and strengths. Their facilities, expertise and networks help convene strategic, large-scale national teams committed to innovation. Budget 2018 will help to lower the cost of partnering with the NRC so more small and medium-sized enterprises, colleges and universities are able to make use of its services. The Government will also create more opportunities for NRC researchers to collaborate with innovators on multi-party research and development programs, and to pursue breakthrough research.

Supporting Federal Science and Technology Facilities

Thousands of scientists and a network of federal laboratories reinforce Canada’s research capabilities and strengths, including through collaborations with post-secondary institutions and businesses. Through Budget 2018, the Government is supporting the renewal of federal science by launching the first phase in an ambitious plan to rebuild federal laboratories. These coordinated investments will create greater opportunity for collaboration across government and within the wider research system.

A More Reliable Partner for Business

The Innovation and Skills Plan launched a review of all innovation programs that serve the business community, in an effort to make the services more responsive to their needs, more efficient and better able to promote business growth. Through Budget 2018, the Government is announcing the next steps in a historic reform of business innovation programs to create a simpler suite that is easy to navigate and will further strengthen the one-stop shop for Canadian businesses—Innovation Canada—to get the information they need to grow, create jobs and drive our economy forward. While total overall funding for innovation programming will increase, the total number of business innovation programs will be streamlined by up to two-thirds. Additional funding will also be provided to regional development agencies in order to help businesses scale up and take advantage of growth opportunities.

Women Entrepreneurs

To face today’s challenges and grow our economy in a way that benefits everyone, Canada must fully access the talents, energies and creativity of all Canadians. With a new strategy for women entrepreneurs focused on skills and access to mentorship, capital and networking opportunities, Budget 2018 will empower women to more fully contribute to, and benefit from, a growing economy. These investments will help more women-owned companies grow into world-class businesses to continue driving economic growth that benefits all. As part of this strategy, the Government will set an objective of increasing the participation of women-owned small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in federal procurement so that they constitute at least 15 per cent of SMEs supplying the Government of Canada.

Making it Easier for Innovators and Entrepreneurs to Do Business

Protecting Canadian Intellectual Property

In a knowledge-based economy, the Government must help to protect the ideas of Canadian innovators and entrepreneurs. Ensuring Canadian intellectual property rules are up to date and reflect the world we live in is fundamental to creating and retaining wealth generated from Canada’s research, development, talent and training. In Budget 2018, the Government is announcing elements of a new intellectual property strategy to help Canadian companies better protect and access ideas to grow and succeed. The Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development will announce details of the strategy in the coming months.

Simpler and Better Procurement

As one of the biggest customers for Canadian businesses, companies have long asked the federal government to improve its relationship with suppliers—to make opportunities easier to find, simpler to navigate and faster to award, with less administrative burden. Government procurement is heavily paper-based and offers limited self-serve options for suppliers. The Government, through Budget 2018, will establish a new electronic procurement platform to help Canadian small and medium-sized companies better access opportunities to do business with the Government.

As innovators, Canadians seek answers to difficult questions, and look for new ways to apply what we’ve learned. The desire to understand how the human heart works led to pioneering efforts in open-heart surgery, and the invention of the artificial pacemaker. Curiosity about how we learn and think led to breakthroughs in machine learning and artificial intelligence—discoveries that help us to navigate traffic with the help of our smartphones today, and will help us get to work and school in self-driving cars in the future.

This spirit of innovation that Canadians share helped to create the industries and jobs that strengthened and grew Canada’s middle class. Today, that same drive to innovate creates new jobs and export opportunities in growing industries as it transforms jobs in existing ones. That means new and exciting job prospects for workers, and better opportunities for our children.

In Budget 2017, the Government launched the Innovation and Skills Plan—an ambitious effort to make Canada a world-leading centre for innovation—to help create more good, well-paying jobs and help strengthen and grow the middle class.

In Budget 2018, the Government is taking the next steps in transforming Canada’s innovation programs—making them easier to access and to use, and expanding support for Canadian companies that want to scale up and take their innovations to markets around the world.

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.



<<< source: advancement-advancement-en.html >>>

ADVANCING OUR SHARED VALUES

Canadians have always worked hard to build a more prosperous future for themselves, their children and their grandchildren. They value Canada’s leadership in building a more just world. They understand that their quality of life today—and their economic success tomorrow—rests on the commitments we make to protect Canada’s nature, parks and wild spaces, while preserving a clean environment for future generations of Canadians. They are proud of our history of helping vulnerable people around the world, because they know that a safer, more prosperous world means a safer and more prosperous Canada. In Budget 2018, the Government is taking a more focused approach to international assistance, by supporting the full empowerment of women and girls in order to change the world for the better.

MEASURES

A Clean Environment for Future Generations

We all want to ensure that our children and grandchildren can continue to hike in our majestic forests and swim in our beautiful lakes, rivers and streams. Budget 2018 proposes one of the largest investments in nature conservation in Canadian history—in order to protect our ecosystems, landscapes and biodiversity, including species at risk. Working in partnership with provinces, territories and Indigenous peoples, this plan will help to conserve 17 per cent of our land and inland waters.

A Sustainable and Clean Economy That Works for Everyone

A clean environment and a strong economy go hand in hand. Pollution has a real cost and puts stress on the health of communities, the economy, and on Canadians themselves. A central part of Canada’s plan to address climate change and grow the economy is the Pan-Canadian Approach to Pricing Carbon Pollution. To ensure that a price on carbon pollution is in place Canada-wide, Budget 2018 provides funding to support the federal carbon pollution pricing system that would apply in provinces and territories that do not have a carbon pricing policy that meets the federal standard.

Advancing Gender Equality Around the World

In Budget 2018, the Government is strengthening the impact of Canada’s new Feminist International Assistance Policy, and advancing Canada’s international leadership in key areas. By making major new investments that focus on gender equality and the full empowerment of women and girls, the Government is helping bring about the change we need for a more equitable, prosperous world.

Protecting Vulnerable Women and Girls

Canada is a global leader when it comes to welcoming newcomers who have fled war or persecution in their home countries. Women and girls represent half of the world’s refugee population and face increased risks due to their gender. Many have suffered from sexual violence and exploitation. Through Budget 2018, the Government is taking action to ensure that Canada welcomes more refugee women and girls from various conflict zones and that we continue to show leadership when providing international assistance to the world’s displaced people.

Addressing the Opioid Crisis in Canada

The Government recognizes that Canada is in the midst of an opioid crisis. In 2016 alone, more than 2,800 Canadian lives were lost to apparent opioid overdoses. The impact of the crisis is being felt in many communities across the country—in inner cities, suburbs, northern and rural communities, as well as in Indigenous communities. Through Budget 2018, the Government provides significant new funding to assist provinces and territories with providing better access to evidence-based treatment services, launches a public education campaign to address stigma that creates barriers for those seeking treatment, and prevents the illegal import of substances.

Pharmacare: Helping Canadians Get the Medicine They Need

Every year, almost one million Canadians give up food and heat to afford the medicine they need. Those Canadians who can pay for their prescriptions face some of the highest costs among the world’s most advanced countries. The high cost of prescription medication means that sometimes sick Canadians must do without. This reality leads to Canadians being less healthy, and significantly higher health care costs for us all. As part of Budget 2018, the Government is creating an Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, which will recommend options on how best to move forward together on this important issue to ensure every Canadian has access to the medicine they need. This builds on significant actions taken over the past two years to make prescription drugs more affordable and accessible.

Getting Ready for the Legalization of Cannabis

The Government has committed to legalize and strictly regulate and restrict access to cannabis, to keep it out of the hands of Canadian children and to keep profits away from criminals and organized crime. To this end, the Government is taking additional steps in preparation for legalization. Through Budget 2018, the Government will ensure that taxes on cannabis products remain low. To help those who rely on medical cannabis, the Government will exempt from excise duties low-THC products, including low-THC cannabidiol oils, which are sometimes used by children facing certain medical conditions, and prescription pharmaceutical products that are derived from cannabis. The Government will also examine options to provide retroactive reimbursement for duties imposed on equivalent products prior to them being given a Drug Identification Number. The Government will also provide additional funding to support community-based organizations and Indigenous organizations that are educating the public on the risks associated with cannabis use.

Increased Support for Canada’s Official Languages

Preserving and protecting Canada’s official languages are an important part of what it means to be Canadian. Official language minority communities hold an important shared history and identity. In 2019 Canada will celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Official Languages Act. The Government understands the challenges that official language minority communities are facing to maintain and grow their place in Canada. To help meet these challenges, Budget 2018 provides additional funding for the following key initiatives: more vital and sustainable community organizations; the attraction and retention of teachers serving official language communities; improving the quality and accessibility of early learning and child care for families in these communities; enhanced cultural, artistic and heritage activities; supporting French- and English-language minority community radio stations and newspapers; the development of an interactive application to make it easy to learn English or French as a second language, and improved access to services in English for English-speaking communities of Quebec. Budget 2018 also supports greater access to legal information and services in both official languages.

Improving Services at the Canada Revenue Agency

The Government recognizes that Canadians have been frustrated by frequent busy signals, dropped calls and long wait times at the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA). To improve telephone services, Budget 2018 proposes funding to hire more agents, monitor feedback from Canadians to improve service, and provide more training to staff so information is more accurate. This will ensure Canadians receive the information they need, when they need it. Furthermore, Budget 2018 proposes to strengthen digital services in order to deliver a more user-friendly experience, as well as expand tax preparation clinics so more Canadians are able to get access to the benefits they are entitled to. The Government will also undertake a comprehensive review of the CRA to ensure that services are delivered in a client-centred way, and that Canadians interacting with the CRA feel like valued clients, not just taxpayers.

Protecting Canadians from cyber attacks

Digital technologies have changed the way Canadians live and how our institutions function. But cyber-attacks are also changing, becoming ever more sophisticated and effective, and have the potential to expose the private information of Canadians and cost Canadian businesses millions of dollars. To help improve the cyber resilience of Canadians when they use digital technologies, and to bolster Canada’s cyber security posture, Budget 2018 proposes significant investments. This includes support for Canada’s first comprehensive cyber security plan—the National Cyber Security Strategy—and the creation of the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security and a National Cybercrime Coordination Unit. These investments will help Canadian businesses better prepare for cyber-attacks, and promote better coordination in response to cyber incidents. The Government will work alongside trusted partners in Canada and around the world to proactively address mutual cyber issues and raise the cyber security bar for all Canadians

Support for public safety and the women and men who keep Canadians safe

Canada is an ideal place to raise families and grow businesses. Public confidence in Canadians’ safety, security and well-being is vital for an inclusive and peaceful society and a growing economy. Budget 2018 proposes various investments in our public safety institutions to help continue keeping Canadians safe. This includes investments in front-line policing operations, radio equipment for police officers and support for border operations. The Government is also committed to supporting the mental health of public safety officers. Budget 2018 provides support for research on post-traumatic stress injuries among public safety officers, as well as targeted supports for federal police officers.

Encouraging safe cross-border economic activity

As an open and welcoming country and as a trading nation, Canada’s borders must be managed in a way that protects Canadians while encouraging cross-border trade and the free flow of goods and people. Budget 2018 maintains this balance by proposing investments that will aid legitimate cross-border traffic, while stopping people and goods posing a threat from entering Canada. The Government is also taking steps to better manage the processing of asylum claimants at the Canada-U.S. border.

Through Budget 2018, the Government is making investments that will improve the delivery of services to Canadians, and enhance the security of our country. This will allow

A clean environment for future generations

Progressive Canadian leadership on the world stage

A safe and restricted access to cannabis once it is legalized

Quicker, more accurate and improved service at the Canadian Revenue Agency

Support for Canada’s safety and security institutions, and for public safety officers, who keep Canadians safe

Smarter borders that allow legitimate travel and commerce, and keep potential threats away

Enhanced cyber security for Canadians and Canadian businesses

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.



<<< source: reconciliation-reconciliation-en.html >>>

ADVANCING RECONCILIATION WITH INDIGENOUS PEOPLES

It is unacceptable that anyone living in Canada should not be able to safely drink the water that comes out of their taps. No person should be forced to live in overcrowded and unsafe homes, and no young person should have to move far from home to get a good education. Yet, all over Canada, these are exactly the challenges faced by Indigenous Peoples. Indigenous Peoples, non-Indigenous Canadians and the Government agree that this must change. Together, Canada and Indigenous Peoples are forging a new relationship, based on recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership.

MEASURES

Clean and Safe Drinking Water

The Government is committed to eliminating all long-term drinking water advisories on public water systems on reserve by March 2021. As of February 12, 2018, 52 long-term drinking water advisories on public water systems have been lifted. Through Budget 2018, the Government is building on investments of previous budgets, with new funding to accelerate the construction of new water systems and renovate existing ones. With these investments, the Government will ensure that more affected water systems will become functional earlier than 2021. New investments would also support efforts to recruit and train water operators—as well as establish innovative First Nations-led service delivery models.

Ensuring That Indigenous Children Are Safe and Supported

Indigenous children under the age of 14 make up less than eight per cent of all children in Canada, yet they represent more than half of the children living in foster care in private homes in the country. This needs to change. The Government is committed to helping Indigenous children and families to be safe and supported within their communities. With Budget 2018, the Government is proposing to increase support for First Nations service providers and support prevention, well-being, and family preservation efforts within communities.

Distinctions-Based Housing

Safe, adequate and affordable housing is essential, but for too many Indigenous Peoples, this remains out of reach. Nearly one in five Indigenous people live in housing that is in need of major repairs, and one in five also live in housing that is overcrowded. Indigenous leaders have told the Government that when it comes to housing in First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation communities, the best approach is one that respects the distinct needs of each Indigenous group. The Government agrees. To address these issues, the Government is providing new, distinctions-based support through Budget 2018 for a First Nations-led housing strategy, an Inuit-led housing plan and the Métis Nation’s housing strategy.

Healthier Communities

There are significant gaps in health between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people. Infant mortality rates for First Nations and Inuit children are up to three times higher than in the Canadian population. Suicide rates among First Nations youth is up to seven times higher. And the prevalence of tuberculosis in the Inuit population was 270 times the rate for the Canadian-born, non-Indigenous population in 2015. We must bridge these gaps. The Government, through Budget 2018, is enhancing the delivery of culturally appropriate addictions treatment and prevention services in communities with high needs, responding to high rates of tuberculosis in Inuit communities, and supporting access to First Nations-controlled quality health care, all of which would lead to improved Indigenous health.

Skills and Employment

Indigenous Peoples are less likely to be employed than non-Indigenous Canadians, and typically earn less. These ongoing employment gaps must be addressed to improve the potential for Indigenous Peoples to fully participate in the economy and strengthen their communities. The Government has consulted with Indigenous leadership and recognizes the importance of a distinctions-based approach. To this end, the Government is announcing through Budget 2018 the creation of a new Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program, which would provide distinctions-based support for First Nations, the Métis Nation and Inuit, as well as urban and non-affiliated Indigenous Peoples. These investments will support Indigenous Peoples to develop employment skills and pursue training for lasting employment.

Supporting the Recognition of Rights

Canada has advanced a number of modern treaties and agreements since the 1970s, but in many cases, the pace of progress has been slow. Negotiations can take a decade or more, and Indigenous communities are forced to take on debt in order to participate. Through Budget 2018, the Government is taking new steps to increase the number of modern treaties and self-determination agreements, in a manner that reflects a recognition of rights approach. As part of this new approach, the Government will replace the use of loans with non-repayable contributions to fund Indigenous participation in the negotiation of modern treaties. Furthermore, the Government will engage with affected Indigenous groups on how best to address past and present negotiation loans, including forgiveness of loans.

Helping Indigenous Nations Reconstitute

Indigenous groups are seeking to rebuild their nations in a manner that responds to their priorities and the unique needs of their communities. The Government supports this vital work. Budget 2018 provides new capacity development for Indigenous peoples, to support activities that facilitate their own path to reconstituting their nations.

Permanent Bilateral Mechanisms

To better serve Indigenous Peoples engaged in the important work of advancing self-government and greater self-determination, the Government created Permanent Bilateral Mechanisms with First Nations, Inuit and the Métis Nation to enable Crown-Indigenous cooperation on annual priority-setting and joint policy development. Through Budget 2018, the Government is proposing increased and ongoing support for the Permanent Bilateral Mechanisms. This will enable the Bilateral Mechanisms to move beyond the first year of initial engagement and allow First Nations, Inuit and the Métis Nation to work on their own priority projects.

New Fiscal Relationship

The Government recognizes that in order to advance reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples and facilitate greater self-determination—including self-government—a new fiscal relationship is needed. As a part of this, Budget 2018 provides new funding to better support First Nations communities, to support strong Indigenous institutions and to advance the new fiscal relationship with First Nations. The Government, with First Nations partners, will also conduct a comprehensive and collaborative review of current federal government programs and funding that support First Nations governance. This will help ensure that these programs provide communities with sufficient resources to hire and retain the appropriate financial and administrative staff to support good governance, plan for the future and advance their vision of self-determination. Through Budget 2018, the Government is also providing support to begin the implementation of new fiscal policy reforms that have been co-developed with self-governing Indigenous Peoples in Canada. This funding will go to support key priorities, including the closing of socio-economic gaps, infrastructure, data collection and governance.

With Budget 2018, the Government is taking further steps towards reconciliation between Canada and Indigenous Peoples. Investments will lead to:

Long-term drinking water advisories on reserve being lifted

Communities having access to clean drinking water

Indigenous children and families being safe and supported within their communities

Better housing for First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation communities

Indigenous Peoples receiving the skills training they need to participate in the economy

First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation leaders having a permanent forum for joint priority-setting with the Government of Canada

Strong Indigenous institutions that play a leading role in the delivery of public services to Indigenous Peoples

Sustainable and sufficient health resources available in each community

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.



<<< source: intro-en.html >>>

A Plan that Puts People First

Over the past two years, the Government has invested in Canadians, and in the things that matter most to Canadians. These investments reflected the choice to reject austerity policies and instead invest wisely in strengthening the middle class and growing the economy. With a declining debt as a percentage of the economy, it’s a choice that makes sense for the Canadian economy.

Anna and Marc live in Burlington with their two-year-old twin daughters.

Anna was excited to return to her graphic design job after her maternity leave ended, but decided to take part-time hours to cut down on day care costs, and to give her more time to spend with her family.

Although they are able to cover their monthly costs with help from the Canada Child Benefit, Anna and Marc worry about what will happen if one of their parents gets sick, or if either of them loses their job and needs to find new work. This budget is for them.

Anna and Marc are realistic about what they can achieve—they remain optimistic that they will be able to give their girls a good life in a community they love.

And thanks to Canadians’ hard work, those early investments are paying off.

The economy is strong and growing. In the last two years, Canadians have created more than half a million jobs, the unemployment rate is near 40-year lows, and our towns and cities are better, cleaner places to live.

With lower taxes for the middle class and more help with the high cost of raising a family, Canadians are feeling more optimistic about the future. Everyday dreams—whether it’s paying down debt, saving for a first home or going back to school to train for a new job—are closer to reality.

By putting the needs of Canadians first, the Government has helped to bring good jobs, more money and renewed confidence to millions of middle class Canadians and their families.

And across Canada, a growing middle class is driving the stronger economic growth that helps create new jobs, and new opportunities for more people to succeed.

But more hard work lies ahead.

A single mother who is struggling to make ends meet doesn’t feel relief when good gross domestic product (GDP) growth numbers are posted—she’s focused on making sure her kids have what they need to be healthy, happy and strong.

Every day, Canadians work hard to build a better life for themselves and their families. Thanks to the efforts of Canada’s middle class and all those working hard to join it…

Canada’s economy is strong and growing. Canada has the fastest growing economy of all the Group of Seven (G7) countries, and is expected to remain among the fastest growing economies both this year and next.

There are more good, well-paying jobs. In the last two years, Canadians have created more than 500,000 jobs—nearly all of them full-time positions.

Consumer confidence is on the rise— now well above the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) average, thanks in part to strong job growth and a growing economy.

Despite these gains, inflation is holding steady , making it easier for Canadians to afford day-to-day costs like food, transportation and clothing, while giving businesses the confidence they need to invest and create more jobs.

A young person trying to land his first job doesn’t worry about consumer confidence—he just wants a chance to find good, meaningful work.

And those who are no longer in the workforce, such as retirees? They care less about economic indicators, and more about making sure they can live their retirement with dignity and security.

These are the people whose hopes and dreams continue to build the Canada we know and love—the women and men who work hard every day to take care of their families, grow their businesses and build a stronger Canada.

With a strong and growing economy in place, now is the right time to focus on the deeper challenges that hold our economy—and our people—back.

It’s time build an economy that truly reflects the kind of country we are, wish to be and need to be.

A country where differences are recognized not as a barrier to success, but as a source of strength.

A place where every child has equal opportunities to achieve their dreams.

A Canada where every person has a real and fair chance at success.

All Canadians deserve the opportunity to contribute to, and prosper from, a strong and growing economy.

For all their hard work, and for all their efforts—seen and unseen, paid and unpaid—Canadians deserve an economy that truly works for them, built on a plan that puts people first.

This is the plan for people.

When Women Succeed, We All Succeed “Equal pay and better economic opportunities for women boost economic growth—creating a bigger pie for everyone to share, women and men alike. Better opportunities for women also promote diversity and reduce economic inequality around the world. It is an economic no-brainer.”

From the 1950s on, Canada welcomed a new generation of workers. For the first time in Canada’s history, well-educated, hard-working Canadian women entered the workforce en masse, helping to boost family incomes and drive economic growth.

Layla’s mom Sarah was one of the first women in her neighbourhood to go back to work after her children were born. For Layla and her brothers, it was completely normal to have both parents working, and Layla knew from a young age that she would follow in her mom’s footsteps.

Over the last 40 years, the rising number of women in the workforce has accounted for about a third of Canada’s real GDP per capita growth. Thanks to the contributions of hard-working women, family incomes are now higher, fewer children live in poverty and all Canadians are better off.

In recent years, women with young children have increasingly been able to enter and stay in the workforce, and in 2017 the share of working-age women in the labour force hit its highest point ever.

For Canadian families, this means greater financial security, and greater peace of mind as they look to the future. With good, steady incomes, hard-working moms have more money to support their families today, and save for years ahead.

With more women in the workforce, businesses benefit too—from the talent, ambition, new perspectives and hard work that women bring to their jobs.

Canada’s economy—Canada’s success—is deeply tied to women’s opportunity to work, and to earn a good living from that work.

Experts agree that our future prosperity depends on greater equality between Canadian women and men. Equality is not just an important value for women and their families, it benefits all Canadians.

McKinsey Global Institute estimates that by taking steps to advance greater equality for women—such as employing more women in technology and boosting women’s participation in the workforce—Canada could add $150 billion to its economy by 2026.

Similarly, RBC Economics estimates that adding more women to the workforce could boost Canada’s GDP by as much as 4 per cent. Closing—and eventually eliminating—the gap between the percentage of women and men who work may even offset expected economic declines brought on by an aging population.

And the Peterson Institute for International Economics has found that increasing the share of women in leadership positions from zero to 30 per cent translated into a 15 per cent boost in profits—that’s more money for businesses to invest in new jobs that will benefit more people.

Simply put, when women have the support and opportunities they need to fully contribute to Canada’s economy, the entire economy does better—today, and well into the future.

For Canadian businesses, hiring, promoting and retaining more women does more than boost the bottom line. Women bring unique perspectives and new ideas to their work, helping companies to innovate and solve problems in new ways.

When more women work, we build stronger companies—and stronger communities.

But the challenges that make it difficult for many women to earn a good living from their work are real and systemic, and the Government recognizes that.

Even when women are paid equally, they do not always have equal opportunities or equal treatment.

For too many Canadian women, the barriers to getting hired and getting promoted persist. This is especially true when social identities like race, religion, sexuality, disability and socio-economic status are considered alongside gender. These women may be pressured to take jobs that do not reflect their skills or education—such as a psychologist working in a food service job—simply because of their desire, and need, to work.

Discrimination and sexual harassment in the workforce, unbalanced parental leave, a decade of no investments in affordable child care, and the shortage of leaders who will advocate for equal workplaces—these are just some of the things that make it tough for women to succeed. And when women are denied opportunities to grow and succeed, we all pay the price.

There is growing consensus among Canadians that the time has come for things to change.

That begins with respect for the choices people make—whether they decide to work within the home, or outside the home.

Increasing the number of women in the workforce, and better supporting those who are already in the workforce, is not a problem to be solved, it’s an economic opportunity to be seized.

It’s a chance to give more Canadians equal access to good, well-paying jobs.

A chance to build a country that is more equal—and more prosperous.

It’s the right thing to do for Canadians, and the smart thing to do for our economy.

Women at Work: Opportunities to be Seized . Greater equality for women could produce significant economic benefits for Canada, but it’s important to know where things stand today, and to recognize the barriers that make it difficult for women to fully succeed in today’s economy.

Canadian women are less likely to participate in the economy, and once employed, more likely to work part-time. In January 2018, only 61 per cent of women were participating in the economy, compared to 70 per cent of men. Women who are 25 to 54 are three times more likely to hold part-time jobs than are men—about 1 million Canadian women aged 25 to 54 work part-time—often because they are caring for children, aging family members or family members with disabilities.

The wage gap between women and men has narrowed, but remains a barrier. The persistent wage gap between what Canadian women and men earn can make it difficult for women to get ahead. On average, women earn 69 cents for every dollar earned by men on an annual basis.

Canadian women are underrepresented in positions of leadership. Though they account for nearly half of the Canadian workforce, only a third of senior managers and one in 20 chief executive officers are women (Catalyst Canada).

Businesses in Canada are overwhelmingly owned by men. The share of small and medium-sized businesses owned by women is increasing but remains at 16 per cent.

The number of women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields remains low. While close to 60 per cent of science and technology graduates are women, that number falls to only one-third of students studying engineering, math and computer science. What’s more, women who graduate from STEM fields earn, on average, $9,000 a year less than their male peers.

The demands of unpaid work can make it difficult for women to pursue opportunities for paid work. Canadian women devote approximately 4 hours a day to unpaid work, compared to about 3 hours for Canadian men. This could include caring for children or elderly parents, or simply doing the day-to-day work needed to support their families.

Not all women face the same challenges. Women with disabilities, visible minorities, Indigenous women, members of the LGBTQ2 community, new Canadians and others with marginalized intersecting identities often find it more challenging to find and keep a good job—not because of the quality of their work, but because of systemic biases that exclude them from opportunities open to other women and men. Despite having higher levels of education than Canadian-born women, only 58 per cent of recent immigrant women aged 25 to 54 are employed, compared to nearly 80 per cent of their non-immigrant counterparts.

Workplace harassment and gender-based violence have a real cost. For too many Canadian women, these challenges can make working difficult, or even impossible. Nearly one in three women in Canada have experienced some form of sexual harassment at work, according to a recent study by Employment and Social Development Canada.

Equality in Action

In previous budgets, the Government took strong and decisive steps toward building a more equal Canada—one where women and men are empowered to make positive changes that benefit their own lives, and our economy as a whole. These measures include:

The Canada Child Benefit (CCB), which gives more help to the families that need it most, such as those led by single mothers .

From baby clothes to bikes to braces to child care, raising children is expensive. The CCB helps families keep up with these high costs. Since its launch in July 2016, the CCB has been supporting more than 3.3 million families with children, putting almost $2 billion each month, tax-free, into the bank accounts of families who need it most.

For single-parent families—most often led by single mothers—the CCB is especially helpful. Last year, single mothers earning less than $60,000 a year received about $9,000 in benefit payments on average, making it easier for them to afford the things that give children a good quality of life—things like a safe place to live, healthy food, summer programs and new winter boots.

For an unemployed single mother who is struggling to make ends meet, the CCB could help with child care costs, making it more affordable for her to return to work. For a working single mother, it may provide the extra financial security needed so that she can work fewer hours, giving her more time to spend with her children.

Historic investments in infrastructure, including new money for public transit to help reduce long commute times and give families more time to spend together; and significant new investments in green infrastructure to ensure that Canada’s communities are healthy and productive places to live.

More money for social infrastructure that families need means substantial new investments in early learning and child care, to give children the best start in life and women the chance to support their families through work.

Though more and more men are taking on family responsibilities, women still carry the heaviest burden when it comes to looking after children and other family members, such as aging parents.

The lack of affordable and accessible child care in many communities means that for too many women, it just doesn’t make financial sense to return to work after parental leave ends. This puts a strain on families whose budgets rely on the support that two incomes can provide, and deprives Canadian workplaces of the talents, skills and insights that working mothers bring to their jobs.

To create more of the high-quality, affordable child care spaces that Canadian families need, and to make it more affordable for parents to return to work, the Government is investing $7.5 billion over 11 years.

This investment will increase the number of affordable child care spaces for low- and modest-income families by supporting up to 40,000 new subsidized child care spaces over the first three years after agreements are in place with provinces and territories. This will, in turn, allow thousands of parents, especially women, to return to the labour market, increasing their family’s financial security and contributing to economic growth that benefits all Canadians.

Housing for women and children escaping family violence, as part of the first-ever National Housing Strategy, that gives more Canadians a safe and affordable place to call home.

Rheal and Sam recently moved to a small apartment closer to Sam’s work. While this means that Sam will be able to walk to work, the couple is paying more in extra rent than they are saving on public transit. They also both worry about Rheal’s sister, who wants to leave an abusive relationship but can’t afford an apartment on her own.

Across Canada, 1.7 million families don’t have a home that meets their basic needs. For these families, the lack of a safe and affordable home makes every other choice more difficult. Moving to a more affordable neighbourhood could mean less access to public transit, health care and other services—and fewer opportunities to find and keep good, well-paying jobs.

Because of their relatively low household incomes, single mothers, women with disabilities, and senior women living alone often find it especially hard to find affordable housing. And for the thousands of Canadian women and children who are homeless due to family violence, housing in shelters doesn’t just provide a safe place to sleep, it saves lives.

To help more Canadians find safe and affordable places to call home, and to protect those already living in community housing from being displaced, the Government is implementing a comprehensive National Housing Strategy. Investments of more than $40 billion over the next 10 years will create over 100,000 new housing units and repair 300,000 housing units for Canadians. This means that 530,000 households will be removed from housing need, 435,000 will benefit from the maintenance and expansion of community housing in Canada, and the estimated number of chronically homeless shelter users will be reduced by 50 per cent. Moreover, at least 25 per cent of National Housing Strategy investments will support projects that specifically target the unique needs of women and girls, including senior women who are more likely than senior men to need affordable housing.

As part of the National Housing Strategy, the National Housing Co-Investment Fund commits to build and renew shelter spaces for survivors fleeing family violence, reducing the wait list for shelter spaces and lowering the number of women who might otherwise risk returning to an unsafe relationship or the street. Government investments in housing will create and repair at least 7,000 shelter spaces for survivors of family violence.

Greater support for women entrepreneurs, whose businesses have room to grow.

Priya runs a small export consulting business out of her home. She routinely has more work than she and her business partner can handle, but without additional capital, they are not able to hire the extra staff and secure the office space they need to service more clients.

With close to half of all new businesses in Canada now started by women, it’s clear that women entrepreneurs are a growing force in the Canadian economy.

At the same time, when it comes to business ownership, men still outnumber women by a large margin. Two-thirds of small and medium-sized businesses in Canada are still majority-owned by men, with fewer than one in six businesses (16 per cent) majority-owned by women. Because small businesses owned by women tend to be smaller than businesses owned by men, there is additional room for these businesses to grow. This growth potential was recognized by the 2015 Expert Panel on Championing and Mentorship for Women Entrepreneurs, chaired by Arlene Dickinson.

Marilyn is a widow who has lived alone since her husband passed away. She doesn’t want to move in with her adult daughter, who is busy raising her own family, and is grateful for the staff at the local food bank, who help to keep her cupboards stocked and spirits up.

To help more women entrepreneurs take their businesses to the next level, the Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC) launched a $50 million fund in 2016 to give women-led technology firms greater access to venture and growth capital—and based a highly promising pipeline, the fund was increased to $70 million in November 2017. The BDC’s 2015 commitment to increase term lending to majority women-owned businesses to at least $700 million over three years has also been surpassed, and as of January 31, 2018, the BDC has lent $912 million to an additional 1,636 women-owned firms, resulting in a 49 per cent increase in its women-owned portfolio since the start of the initiative. These investments are expected to fuel the growth of these businesses and create jobs for Canadians across the country, while helping more women entrepreneurs become successful role models for the next generation of enterprising girls.

Improvements to the Guaranteed Income Supplement, which provides greater income security for low-income seniors, especially senior women.

Retirement is meant to be the reward after a lifetime of hard work, but for too many senior women in Canada, it simply means financial hardship. Senior women are 1.5 times as likely to live in poverty as senior men.

To give Canadian seniors greater security and a better quality of life, in 2016, the Government boosted the Guaranteed Income Supplement paid to low-income single seniors. This enhancement gives those seniors most in need as much as $947 more each year, and is helping to lift 13,000 vulnerable seniors—12,000 of them senior women—out of poverty.

More support for Canadians—most often women—who care for their loved ones.

Johanne works full-time as a college instructor. Her dad, who lives alone, is recovering from a stroke. Thanks to the EI Family Caregiver Benefit, Johanne was able to take time off to help her dad, without losing all her income or her job.

Today, millions of Canadians provide informal care and support for family members who are seriously ill. For those who need help, the care they receive from their families is priceless. For those who offer help, however, balancing work and family responsibilities can be emotionally, physically and financially draining.

To help lessen the burden on caregivers, the Government introduced a new Employment Insurance (EI) caregiving benefit that allows eligible caregivers to claim up to 15 weeks of EI benefits while they are temporarily away from work to support or care for a critically ill or injured family member.

Because women are more likely to provide care than men—accounting for about 70 per cent of claims under a previous compassionate care program—and because women spend more time per week engaged in caregiving compared to men, women are expected to get the most from this new benefit.

Equality + Growth: A Strong Middle Class

Canada is a country built on hard work, a place where people take care of each other, and work together to solve big challenges.

For the past two years, that hard work has helped to strengthen and grow Canada’s economy, creating more opportunities for the middle class and all those working hard to join it.

It is time for the Government, and for all Canadians, to tackle the next big challenge: making sure that every person has an equal chance to contribute to, and share in, Canada’s success.

Budget 2018 is a plan to deliver more prosperity and growth to Canadians, fuelled by greater equality for all Canadians.

This plan focuses on:

Growth —A strong economy starts with a strong and growing middle class. Budget 2018 introduces a more generous and accessible Canada Workers Benefit for low-income workers (formerly the Working Income Tax Benefit) and improved parental benefits, alongside continued investments to help Canadians find and keep good, well-paying jobs. Combined with historic pay equity legislation and new measures to improve tax fairness, these measures will give Canada’s middle class the help it needs to grow and prosper.

Progress —Investments in Budget 2018 will build on Canada’s tradition of innovation, helping to create positive change for ourselves, and the world. These investments in entrepreneurs, researchers and scientists will help build the Canada of tomorrow—and the strong middle class of today.

GBA+ is an analytical tool used to assess how different groups of women, men and gender-diverse people may experience policies, programs and initiatives.

The “plus“ acknowledges that GBA goes beyond biological (sex) and socio-cultural (gender) differences to consider intersecting factors such as race, ethnicity, age, disability and sexual orientation.

GBA+ provides the foundation for gender budgeting—ensuring that the impacts of individual budget proposals on different groups of people are understood, supporting better policy making, priority-setting and decision making.

Reconciliation —Building on earlier investments, the distinctions-based investments to deliver clean water, housing, training, health care and other programs in Budget 2018 will help to secure a better quality of life for Indigenous Peoples, while laying the foundation for a renewed relationship based on the recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership.

Advancement— The country we share and the values that connect us help to define who we are as Canadians. Through Budget 2018, the Government highlights these points of connection with investments that protect Canada’s natural legacy, affirm our place in and commitment to the world, uphold our shared values and help make Canada a safer, more just country.

Equality— Where Budget 2017 included the Government’s first-ever Gender Statement —a high-level review of the ways in which the policies put forward affect women and men in different ways—Budget 2018 goes further, integrating considerations of gender impacts at each step of the budgeting process, and introducing a new Gender Results Framework . This Framework includes goals and indicators that will guide the Government’s decisions and measure Canada’s progress in achieving greater gender equality.

In Budget 2018, no budget decision was taken without being informed by Gender-based Analysis Plus (GBA+). And to ensure that gender remains a key consideration for future governments, the Government will introduce new GBA+ legislation to make gender budgeting a permanent part of the federal budget-making process.

The Gender Results Framework has informed the investments made in Budget 2018, and each chapter of this budget shows how these investments are advancing the objectives of Canada’s new Gender Results Framework.

Figure 1: Pillars of the Gender Results Framework

Conclusion

Budget 2018 recognizes that Canada’s future economic success rests not only on the hard work of Canadians, but on giving more people—people like Anna and Marc, Layla, Sarah, Rheal and Sam, Priya, Marilyn, and Johanne—a real and fair chance to succeed.

For all they do, all Canadians deserve to be equal partners in society, and to share equally in the benefits that come from their hard work.

Budget 2018 will help make this goal a reality.



<<< source: chap-01-en.html >>>

"More women in leadership positions won’t just grow our economy, create jobs, and strengthen our communities. It will also lead to innovation and change in the workplace—innovation and change that workers so desperately need."

Making sure every Canadian has an equal and fair chance at success isn’t just the right thing to do, it’s the smart thing to do. Canada’s future prosperity depends on it.

To face the challenges of today and tomorrow, we will need the hard work and creativity of all Canadians. And in return, we need to make sure that the benefits of a growing economy are felt by more and more people—with more good, well-paying jobs for the middle class and everyone working hard to join it.

Over the last two years, Canada’s economic growth has been fuelled by a stronger middle class. Canadians’ hard work, combined with historic investments in people and in communities, helped to create more good jobs—while more help for those who need it most has meant more money for people to save, invest, and spend in their communities.

But there is more to do.

In Budget 2018, the Government is introducing new measures to help build an economy that truly works for everyone.

Introducing the Canada Workers Benefit, a strengthened version of the Working Income Tax Benefit, means that low-income workers can take home more money while they work—encouraging more people to join the workforce, and offering real help to more than 2 million Canadians, who are working hard to join the middle class.

Strengthening the Canada Child Benefit will give hard-working moms and dads more money each month to buy the things their families need—with the most help going to the families who need it most.

Improving parental benefits will help parents to share the burden of care at home more equally, while allowing people the flexibility to return to work sooner, if they so choose.

And introducing historic pay equity legislation will give more Canadian women fair compensation for their hard work and will set the standard for how women’s work is valued in the workplace. The Government is proud to lead these efforts to reduce the gender wage gap and ensure that women working in federally regulated industries receive equal pay for work of equal value.

The Government will also continue its investments in skills and training programs to give Canadians from all backgrounds the skills they need to succeed in an increasingly globalized world.

Budget 2018 also includes new measures to connect Canadian businesses with global customers, by strengthening and diversifying Canada’s trade relationships around the world.

Underpinning the Government’s efforts to help strengthen and grow the middle class is an unwavering commitment to equality of opportunity, and a belief that the wealthiest Canadians must pay their fair share. In addition to finalizing its plans to address tax planning strategies used by a few wealthy owners of private corporations, the Government is taking further action to close loopholes and combat aggressive international tax avoidance.

Key Chapter 1 initiatives that advance objectives of Canada’s new Gender Results Framework:

Improving access to the Canada Child Benefit and other benefits in Indigenous communities

Addressing the gender wage gap by supporting equal pay for equal work in federally regulated workplaces and implementing pay transparency

Promoting more equal parenting roles with a new Employment Insurance Parental Sharing Benefit

Helping women enter and succeed in the trades

More Help for the Middle Class and People Working Hard to Join It

The Government has a plan to invest in the middle class and people working hard to join it. This includes more support for those who need it most, to ensure that the benefits of growth are widely shared.

Over the last four decades, lower- and middle-income workers have seen their wage prospects stall—making it more difficult to make ends meet each month. At the same time, the number of Canadians in low-wage jobs is high by international standards, and many of these workers struggle to support their families and afford basics like healthy food and clothes for growing kids.

Introducing the Canada Workers Benefit

The Working Income Tax Benefit (WITB) is a refundable tax credit that supplements the earnings of low-income workers. By letting low-income workers take home more money while they work, the benefit encourages more people to join and remain in the workforce, and currently offers real help to Canadians who are working hard to join the middle class.

First introduced in the fall of 2005, the WITB has evolved over time. In 2016, the Government announced a $250 million enhancement of the WITB, starting in 2019, as part of the enhancement of the Canada Pension Plan. In the 2017 Fall Economic Statement , the Government committed to further enhance the WITB by an extra $500 million annually. This will put more money in the pockets of low-income workers, and give people a little extra help as they transition to work.

In Budget 2018, the Government proposes to strengthen the program by making it more generous, and making the benefit more accessible. This strengthened benefit will be named the Canada Workers Benefit (CWB) and will take effect in 2019.

Using the funding announced in the 2017 Fall Economic Statement , the Government proposes to increase maximum benefits under the CWB by up to $170 in 2019 and increase the income level at which the benefit is phased out completely. The Government also proposes to increase the maximum benefit provided through the CWB disability supplement by an additional $160 to offer greater support to Canadians with disabilities who face financial barriers to entering the workforce.

As a result of these enhancements, a low-income worker earning $15,000 a year could receive up to nearly $500 more from the program in 2019 than she received in 2018. That’s more money to spend on things like groceries, utility bills and other essentials.

[Chart 1.1 - Text version]

[Chart 1.2 - Text version]

[Chart 1.3 - Text version]

Department of Finance Canada analysis has shown that eligible workers who file their own taxes using paper forms are more likely than those who file electronically to miss out on claiming this benefit. Allowing the CRA to automatically provide the benefit to eligible filers would be especially helpful to people with reduced mobility, people who live far from service locations and people who don’t have Internet access. Additional investments in outreach activities and the CRA’s Community Volunteer Income Tax Program will also support access to benefits for vulnerable groups.

Improving Access to the Canada Workers Benefit

At the same time, the Government recognizes that not all low-income workers are receiving the CWB (previously WITB) payment that they are entitled to. This happens because some lower-income workers do not claim the benefit on their tax return. The Government is proposing amendments that will allow the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to automatically determine whether these tax filers are eligible for the benefit. An estimated 300,000 additional low-income workers will receive the new CWB for the 2019 tax year as a result of these changes. This represents a major step forward in fulfilling the Government’s commitment of making sure that all Canadians receive the tax benefits and credits to which they are entitled.

CWB enhancements, combined with new investments to make sure that every worker who qualifies actually receives the benefit, will mean that the Government is investing almost $1 billion of new funding for the benefit in 2019, relative to 2018. The Government estimates that enhancements and improved take-up in 2019 will directly benefit more than 2 million working Canadians, many of whom were not benefitting from the WITB. This will help lift approximately 70,000 Canadians out of poverty.

Moving forward, the Government will continue to work with interested provinces and territories to harmonize benefits and help support the transition from social assistance and into work. Quebec, Alberta, British Columbia and Nunavut have already taken advantage of the opportunity to make province- and territory-specific changes to the design of the program.

In addition, over the next year, the Government will also begin work on improving the delivery of the CWB to provide better support to low-income Canadians throughout the year, rather than through an annual refund after filing their taxes.

Andie is a single, 20-year-old woman who works part-time at a second-hand store. After recovering from a serious illness, Andie was eager to begin working again but has struggled to find a full-time job. Although she qualified to receive the Working Income Tax Benefit, she wasn’t aware of the program until a co-worker mentioned it to her after tax filing time. With the improvements the Government is proposing under the new Canada Workers Benefit, workers like Andie will automatically receive the CWB, starting in the 2019 tax year.

Strengthening the Canada Child Benefit

The Canada Child Benefit (CCB), introduced in 2016, gives low- and middle-income parents more money each month, tax-free, to help with the high costs of raising kids. Compared to the old system of child benefits, the CCB is simpler, more generous and better targeted to give more help to people who need it most.

Thanks to the CCB, nine out of 10 Canadian families have extra help each month to pay for things like sports programs, music lessons and back-to-school clothes. The benefit helps almost 6 million children—putting more than $23 billion back in the bank accounts of hard-working Canadian families. Families receiving the CCB are getting $6,800 on average this year. Since its introduction in 2016, the CCB has helped lift hundreds of thousands of Canadian children out of poverty.

[Chart 1.4 - Text version]

To ensure that the CCB continues to help Canadian families over the long term, the 2017 Fall Economic Statement indexed CCB benefits, starting in July 2018, to keep pace with the cost of living. Indexing the CCB will provide an additional $5.6 billion in support to Canadian families over the 2018–19 to 2022–23 period.

Myriam is a single mother of two children aged 5 and 8. Her net income was $35,000 in 2016. Myriam’s family will have received $11,125 in tax-free CCB payments in the 2017–18 benefit year, $3,535 more than she would have received under the old system of child benefits.

Last year, single mothers earning less than $60,000 a year received about $9,000 in benefit payments on average to help make things like healthy food, summer programs and winter clothes more affordable

Improving Access to the Canada Child Benefit and Other Benefits

Indigenous Peoples, in particular those living in remote and northern communities, face distinct barriers when it comes to accessing federal benefits such as the Canada Child Benefit. To help Indigenous Peoples access the full range of federal social benefits, the Government will provide $17.3 million over three years, starting in 2018–19, to expand outreach efforts to Indigenous communities, and to conduct pilot outreach activities for urban Indigenous communities.

Enhancing the Wage Earner Protection Program

Innovation is changing how we live and work, bringing with it new realities for Canadian workers. To support workers in this new environment, the Government will propose legislative amendments to the Wage Earner Protection Program Act to increase the maximum payment under the Wage Earner Protection Program to seven weeks of Employment Insurance insurable earnings from four. Changes will also be made to make eligibility for the Program more equitable, so that workers who are owed wages, vacation, severance or termination pay when their employer files for bankruptcy or enters receivership receive greater support during a difficult time.

A More Secure Retirement

Every Canadian deserves a secure retirement, free of financial worries. Canada’s public pensions—the Old Age Security (OAS) program and the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans—play an important role in giving Canadians confidence that they can retire in dignity. The Government is committed to strengthening public pensions and to improving the quality of life for seniors now, and for generations to come.

Since 2016, the Government has:

Increased Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS) payments by up to $947 per year for single recipients, which is helping nearly 900,000 low-income seniors, of which 70 per cent are women.

Ensured that senior couples who receive GIS and Allowance benefits and have to live apart—because of long-term care requirements, for example—can receive higher benefits based on their individual incomes.

Restored the eligibility age for OAS and GIS benefits to 65, putting thousands of dollars back in the pockets of Canadians as they become seniors.

[Chart 1.5 - Text version]

In June 2016, the Government reached an historic agreement with provinces to enhance the Canada Pension Plan (CPP). The CPP Enhancement, which will begin to be phased in as of January 2019, means more money for Canadians when they retire, so that they can worry less about their savings and focus more on enjoying time with their families. With the action taken by Quebec to enhance the Quebec Pension Plan in a similar fashion, all Canadian workers can now look forward to a safer and more secure retirement.

The CPP Enhancement will give Canadian workers greater income security when they retire, and offers a number of advantages over other types of savings:

It will provide a secure, predictable benefit in retirement, so Canadians can worry less about outliving their savings, and be less anxious about the safety of their investments.

Benefits will be indexed, which means that they will keep up with the cost of living.

It is a good fit for both experienced workers and young people entering Canada’s changing job market for the first time. The Enhancement will help to fill the gap left by declining workplace pension coverage, and will be portable across jobs and provinces.

The CPP Enhancement will be phased in gradually starting in 2019 and will raise the maximum CPP retirement benefit by up to 50 per cent over time. This translates into an increase in the current maximum retirement benefit of more than $7,000, from $13,610 to nearly $21,000 in today’s dollar terms.

Building on this achievement, in December 2017, federal and provincial Ministers reached a unanimous agreement in principle to take the following actions, beginning in 2019:

Increase retirement benefits under the CPP Enhancement both for parents who take time off work to care for young children, and for persons with severe and prolonged disabilities. For the purposes of calculating the retirement pension, parents and persons with disabilities will be credited with an amount linked to their previous earnings for periods spent out of the workforce, or periods with low earnings.

Raise survivor’s pensions for individuals under age 45 who lose their spouse, by providing a full survivor’s pension instead of the current reduced pension that is linked to the age of the widow or widower.

Provide a top-up disability benefit to retirement pension recipients under the age of 65 who are disabled and meet eligibility requirements.

Increase the death benefit to its maximum value of $2,500 for all eligible contributors.

The Government intends to introduce legislation to implement the agreement reached by Ministers, along with technical and consequential amendments. The proposed changes would not result in an increase to contribution rates.

Protecting Canadians’ Pensions

In recent years, we have seen companies, such as Sears Canada, entering the insolvency process with substantial unfunded pension liabilities. As a result, workers and pensioners, who have paid into pension plans over their careers, are faced with unexpected financial losses that impact their retirement security.

All Canadians deserve more peace of mind when it comes to their retirement and companies must act in good faith towards their employees. At the same time, we recognize the challenges facing courts as they try to maximize recovery in bankruptcies that affect not just workers and pensioners, but also small businesses, lenders, and other creditors which are owed money. Our government is committed to finding a balanced way forward.

That’s why, over the coming months, we will be looking to obtain feedback from pensioners, workers, and companies. We will take a whole-of-government, evidence-based approach towards addressing retirement security for all Canadians.

Building More Rental Housing for Canadian Families

Finding a safe and affordable place to call home is a challenge for a growing number of Canadians. Many of our cities lack affordable rental housing, and growing populations and the rising cost of home ownership make it more challenging to find—and afford—a good place to live. The high demand for housing in many communities drives up rental rates and makes it more difficult for Canadians to live and work in the same community.

Approximately 30 per cent of Canadians rely on the rental market for housing. While patterns will vary across cities, future demand for affordable rental housing is expected to rise as the population ages, young professionals migrate to larger cities, and immigration continues to grow our communities. Canadians who wish to buy a home now need a longer period of time to save for a down payment, especially in Canada’s biggest cities.

In April 2017, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation launched the Rental Construction Financing Initiative, which will provide $2.5 billion in low-cost loans to support the construction of new rental housing, relieving pressure in rental markets that are experiencing low vacancy rates.

To be eligible, borrowers must demonstrate that their projects are financially viable without ongoing operating subsidies. The Financing Initiative will prioritize projects that demonstrate greater social outcomes and may offer a loan for up to 100 per cent of the cost of these projects. Borrowers must meet minimum requirements for affordability, energy efficiency and accessibility. Lower-cost loans will be provided for terms of up to 10 years, making costs more predictable during the earliest and most challenging phases of development.

Unfortunately, high demand for rental housing has not translated into an increase in supply. Vacancy rates remain low in large urban centres such as Toronto and Vancouver—at 1.0 per cent and 0.9 per cent, respectively.

To encourage a stable supply of affordable rental housing across the country, the Government proposes to increase the amount of loans provided by the Rental Construction Financing Initiative from $2.5 billion to $3.75 billion over the next three years. This new funding is intended to support projects that address the needs of modest- and middle-income households struggling in expensive housing markets. In total, this measure alone is expected to spur the construction of more than 14,000 new rental units across Canada. The Government proposes to provide $113.6 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation to expand the Rental Construction Financing Initiative.

[Figure 1.1 - Text version]

Equality in the Workforce

Women represent half of Canada’s population, and their full and equal participation in Canada’s economy is essential for our future. Removing the systemic barriers to women’s full economic participation will support economic growth, strengthen the middle class, and build a fairer society that gives everyone a real and fair chance at success.

Addressing the Gender Wage Gap

In Canada today, women earn 31 per cent less than men do. Put another way, the median income for women is $28,120, compared with $40,890 for men. The reasons behind the gender wage gap are deep-rooted and complex. Closing the gap will require leadership and a comprehensive approach, involving multiple tools.

The gender wage gap is the average difference between what a woman makes relative to a man in the workplace, and it is a good indicator of the broader state of gender equality in society.

Right now in Canada, the median annual earning for a woman is about 31 per cent lower than the median earning for a man. This is due to a number of factors, including a greater proportion of women in part-time jobs and in lower-paid fields, sectors and occupations. There are also a range of work, family and societal issues that contribute to this gap, from discrimination in the workplace to stereotypes about gender roles, to unequal sharing of caregiving responsibilities, leading to fewer hours worked by women.

The net result is that women in Canada have a lower earning potential, and fewer opportunities to advance their career, or move into a position of leadership.

One of the main causes of the gender wage gap is the undervaluation of the work that has traditionally been done by women. Requiring equal pay for work of equal value is an effective way to fix this gap. To help address this issue, the Government will bring in a legislated proactive pay equity regime in federally regulated sectors, which would apply to approximately 1.2 million employed individuals.

The difficulty of balancing work and family life, combined with the fact that caregiving responsibilities—from child rearing to caring for aging family members—more often than not fall to women, is another cause of the gender wage gap. This can lead women to work shorter hours, or look for jobs that offer more flexibility, which can mean fewer hours worked and fewer opportunities for advancement over a lifetime. Greater flexibility for parents receiving parental benefits, including in the sharing of leave, can help balance caring responsibilities within the home, and provide women with the option to return to work sooner, should they wish to do so. Access to affordable child care is another key factor in encouraging women back into the workforce. Measures to advance women in leadership and promote participation in non-traditional careers can also contribute to closing the gender wage gap.

Progress Toward Equal Pay for Equal Work

When Canadian women have more opportunities to work and earn a good living, everyone benefits. McKinsey Global Institute estimates that by taking steps to advance greater equality for women—such as reducing the gender wage gap by employing more women in technology, and boosting women’s participation in the workforce—Canada could add $150 billion to its economy by 2026.

There is significant progress required. For every dollar of hourly wages a man working full-time earns in Canada, a woman working full-time earns about 88 cents. Canada ranks 15th out of 29 OECD countries based on the hourly gender wage gap. This disparity persists despite the fact that pay equity is a human right entrenched in law. As the largest employer in the country, many have called on the federal government to lead by example—and that is what the Government will do.

To ensure that employees in federally regulated workplaces receive equal pay for work of equal value, Budget 2018 will move forward with new proactive pay equity legislation. This will be included in budget implementation legislation.

This legislation will draw on models in Ontario and Quebec but will take an innovative approach to ensure that on average, women and men in federally regulated sectors receive the same pay for work of equal value. Preliminary estimates suggest this could reduce the gender wage gap by about 2.7 cents for the core public administration (to 94.1 cents on the dollar), and by about 2.6 cents in the federal private sector (to 90.7 cents on the dollar)‎. This analysis will be refined further as the legislation moves forward‎.

To address the complexity of the federal sectors, this legislation would:

Apply to federal employers with 10 or more employees, with pay equity requirements built as much as possible into existing federal compliance regimes.

Establish a streamlined pay equity process for employers with fewer than 100 employees.

Set out specific timelines for implementation, and compulsory maintenance reviews.

Include job types such as seasonal, temporary, part-time and full-time positions.

Provide independent oversight.

Ensure that both wages and other benefits are evaluated in a gender-neutral way.

Apply to the Federal Contractors Program on contracts equal to or greater than $1 million, and ensure a robust application of federal employment equity law.

Repeal previous legislation such as the Public Sector Equitable Compensation Act which is inconsistent with the goal of pay equity.

The Government will continue to consult with employers, unions and other stakeholders in the coming months to ensure that the new regime will be applied fairly and will achieve its intended purpose. While proactive pay equity legislation is an important tool to close the gender wage gap, it needs to be part of a broader array of policy tools such as the Government’s investments in early learning and child care, enhanced training and learning financing, enhanced parental leave flexibility, pay transparency and the continued appointment of talented women into leadership positions.

Pay Transparency

The Government will provide Canadians with more information on pay practices of employers in the federally regulated sector. This would include converting existing pay information filed by federally regulated employers under the Employment Equity Act into more user-friendly online content, with specific attention paid to making existing wage gaps more evident. This will help to highlight employers who lead in equitable pay practices, while holding employers accountable for wage gaps that affect women, Indigenous Peoples, persons with disabilities and visible minorities. Experience in other jurisdictions has shown it to be helpful in raising awareness about the wage gap. The Government will commit $3 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to implement pay transparency.

Recognizing that barriers to women’s labour market participation can be complex and slow to move, the Government will also host a major symposium on women and the workplace in the spring of 2019. This symposium will bring together leaders in the private and public sectors to discuss and share best practices. The objective of the symposium would be to encourage and provide tools for Canadian employers to address issues faced by women in the workplace, from wage gaps to harassment. The Government will provide $1.5 million over 2018–19 and 2019–20 for this symposium.

Closing the wage gap between men and women requires action on many fronts. Investing in affordable and accessible child care and family leave, increasing women’s participation in traditionally male-dominated occupations, encouraging men to work in traditionally female-dominated occupations, implementing family-friendly workplace policies and challenging gender stereotypes that reinforce notions of “appropriate” work for men and women are some of these areas. Through Budget 2018, the Government will take targeted action to advance these goals—recognizing the significant work that remains to be done.

Supporting Equal Parenting and the Flexibility for Earlier Returns to Work

For most Canadians, starting a family typically comes at the same time that parents-to-be are working to establish or further their careers. To help new parents care for their children during those critical early months, Employment Insurance (EI) maternity and parental benefits are available. These help to provide greater financial security when parents are away from work.

EI parental benefits are available to both parents, allowing either parent to take time off work. The most common scenario, however, involves the mother taking on the primary caregiving responsibilities once their child is born. While the second parent may take on many household and caregiving responsibilities, child care duties continue to fall disproportionately to mothers, both in the short term following the arrival of their child, and over the longer term, often due to the challenges of re-entering the workforce after time spent away.

[Chart 1.6 - Text version]

Budget 2017 announced greater flexibility for families by allowing parents to choose to receive up to 61 weeks of EI parental benefits over an extended period of 18 months at a lower benefit rate of 33 per cent of average weekly earnings. Previously, 35 weeks of EI parental benefits were available at the standard benefit rate of 55 per cent to be paid over a period of 12 months. Making EI parental benefits more flexible helps working parents navigate the challenges that come with a growing family.

To support greater gender equality in the home and in the workplace, the Government proposes to provide $1.2 billion over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $344.7 million per year thereafter, to introduce a new EI Parental Sharing Benefit.The Benefit will provide additional weeks of “use it or lose it” EI parental benefits, when both parents agree to share parental leave.This incentive is expected to be available starting June 2019.

This builds on best practices in Quebec and other jurisdictions which have found that incentives play a key role in who takes time off to provide caregiving. In 2016, for example, 80 per cent of new fathers in Quebec claimed or intended to claim parental benefits, in part because of leave that was specifically reserved for them. In the rest of Canada, which does not provide second parent leave, this same figure is only 12 per cent.

The proposal is also informed by recent recommendations from the Canada-U.S. Council for Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs and Business Leaders, which has identified the need for better parental leave policies as key to the economic empowerment of women.

The proposed benefit will be available to eligible two-parent families, including adoptive and same-sex couples, to take at any point following the arrival of their child. This Benefit would increase the duration of EI parental leave by up to five weeks in cases where the second parent agrees to take a minimum of five weeks of the maximum combined 40 weeks available using the standard parental option of 55 per cent of earnings for 12 months. Alternatively, where families have opted for extended parental leave at 33 per cent of earnings for 18 months, the second parent would be able to take up to eight weeks of additional parental leave. In cases where the second parent opts not to take the additional weeks of benefits, standard leave durations of 35 weeks and 61 weeks will apply.

Providing additional weeks of benefits will help encourage greater equality when it comes to child care, and improve the distribution of family and home responsibilities. It will also provide greater flexibility—particularly for mothers—to return to work sooner, if they so choose, knowing their family has the support it needs. More equitable parental leave will also help lead to more equitable hiring practices, reducing conscious and unconscious discrimination by employers.

To implement this change to the EI program, the Government proposes to amend the Employment Insurance Act . In addition, the Government proposes to amend the Canada Labour Code to ensure that workers in federally regulated industries have the job protection they need while they are receiving EI parental benefits.

[Figure 1.2 - Text version]

Emman and Simon are expecting a child. In addition to the 15 weeks of EI maternity benefits that Emman is eligible for, the couple is eligible to receive and share up to 35 weeks of EI parental benefits (paid at 55 per cent of their average weekly earnings).

Together, Emman and Simon have decided that both of them will take leave from work and share EI parental benefits to care for their child. As a result of the new EI Parental Sharing Benefit, Emman and Simon are eligible for an additional five weeks of benefits when Simon agrees to take a minimum of five weeks.

Examples of How the New EI Parental Sharing Benefit Will Work for a Variety of Family Situations

Natasha and Julie are a same-sex couple. Natasha is pregnant and expecting a child. They decide to apply for the standard parental benefits option.

Current model:

When applying for standard parental benefits, they decide that Natasha will access 30 weeks of benefits, and Julie will access 5 weeks of parental benefits (total of 35 weeks).

Proposed model:

When applying for standard parental benefits, they decide Natasha will access 30 weeks of benefits, and Julie will access 10 weeks of parental benefits (total of 40 weeks because they are sharing). Neither of them exceed the limit of 35 weeks per parent.

If Natasha and Julie had chosen the extended parental benefits option, up to 8 additional weeks of benefits paid at 33 per cent are available when sharing extended parental benefits.

Michel and François plan to adopt a child. They decide that both of them will take leave from work and share the parental benefits to care for their child.

The couple chooses the standard parental benefits option.

Current model :

When applying for standard parental benefits, they decide that Michel will access 25 weeks of benefits, and François will access 10 weeks of parental benefits (total of 35 weeks).

Proposed model:

When applying for standard parental benefits, they decide to distribute the additional weeks between them so that Michel will access 28 weeks of benefits, and François will access 12 weeks of parental benefits (total of 40 weeks because they are sharing). Neither of them exceed the limit of 35 weeks per parent.

If Michel and François had chosen the extended parental benefits option, up to 8 additional weeks of benefits paid at 33 per cent are available when sharing extended parental benefits

Raoul and Maria plan to adopt a child. They decide to apply for the standard parental benefits option.

Current model :

When applying for standard parental benefits, they decide that Maria will access 20 weeks of benefits, and Raoul will access 15 weeks of parental benefits (total of 35 weeks).

Proposed model:

When applying for standard parental benefits, they decide that Maria will access 35 weeks of benefits, and Raoul will access 5 weeks of parental benefits (total of 40 weeks because they are sharing). Neither of them exceed the limit of 35 weeks per parent.

If Raoul and Maria had chosen the extended parental benefits option, up to 8 additional weeks of benefits paid at 33 per cent are available when sharing extended parental benefits.

Jessica and Mark are expecting a child. They decide to apply for the standard parental benefits option.

Current model :

The couple decides that Jessica will receive the maximum 35 weeks of standard parental benefits to care for their baby before returning to work.

Mark will not access any weeks of EI parental benefits.

Proposed model:

The couple decides that Jessica will receive the maximum 35 weeks of standard parental benefits to care for their baby before returning to work.

Since they decided that Mark will not access any weeks of EI parental benefits, the couple can only receive a maximum of 35 weeks (total of 35 weeks because they are not sharing). The additional 5 weeks are left on the table.

If Jessica and Mark had chosen the extended parental benefits option, Jessica could receive up to 61 weeks of extended parental benefits. The additional 8 weeks are left on the table

More Accessible and Affordable Early Learning and Child Care

Access to quality child care is a major challenge faced by many Canadian families, with only 1 in 4 Canadian children having access to a regulated child care space. Families are also concerned about child care affordability, with daily child care fees that are high and rising.

The affordability and accessibility of early learning and child care options are important in encouraging women to go back to work after parental leave. When child care fees are too high, many families opt to have one parent stay at home instead of returning to work. This is especially the case for low-income workers, and most often it is women who forgo paid employment. Affordable child care is particularly important for single mothers, who often struggle to secure child care and engage in paid work, and who face a greater risk of poverty than two-parent families.

In Budget 2017, the Government announced a long-term investment of $7.5 billion over 11 years, starting in 2017–18, to support more accessible and affordable early learning and child care.

This was followed, in June 2017, by federal, provincial and territorial governments reaching a historic agreement on a Multilateral Early Learning and Child Care Framework, which will guide new investments in early learning and child care towards five key principles—quality, accessibility, affordability, flexibility and inclusivity.

The Government of Canada is entering into three-year bilateral agreements with provinces and territories, with the intent to review and adjust these agreements as needed at each period of renewal over the 11-year framework. Nine agreements have been reached so far.

Nine bilateral agreements have now been signed with provinces and territories. Here are some of the results Canadians can expect to see in their communities by 2020.

Newfoundland and Labrador

Up to 540 children will have access to free or low-cost child care due to changes to the Child Care Services Subsidy Program

Increase in quality and training for child care centres serving up to 1,750 children

New Brunswick

As many as 300 facilities will be transformed into designated early learning centres, resulting in some 9,900 children benefitting from low-fee child care

Nova Scotia

Families in harder-to-reach communities will have greater access to affordable child care through the creation of 15 new child care centres, 500 new child care spaces, and 90 new family day care sites

Nunavut

All 39 centres and as many as 210 educators in Nunavut will benefit from Territory-wide training and as many as 838 children will benefit from continued access to child care spaces

Ontario

Up to 100 new Ontario Early Years Child and Family Centres will be created, supporting as many as 100,000 more child and family drop-in visits

Up to 11,200 children will be supported through additional fee subsidies or equivalent financial supports

Prince Edward Island

Up to 100 children whose parents work non-standard or seasonal hours and can receive specialized child care tailored to their needs

Up to 200 infants and preschool children will be able to access a regulated space (10 per cent increase)

Yukon

Support 90 per cent of child care centres in maintaining fees without increasing costs to parents

British Columbia

The province is developing prototype centres to test the introduction of universal child care. Children across the province will have access to low-cost infant and toddler spaces at significantly reduced parent fees, including children from low-income families benefiting from free child care

Manitoba

An estimated 1,400 more affordable child care spaces will be created to support lower-income, French-language and newcomer families, as well as underserved communities

The Government is also partnering with Indigenous organizations to engage with Indigenous Peoples across the country to co-develop an Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework . This framework will reflect the unique cultural needs of First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation children across Canada. A commitment of $360 million, starting in 2017-18, has been made towards the Framework over the next three years.

In addition to bilateral agreements with other levels of government, the Government will also dedicate funding towards specific initiatives to support better outcomes for early learning and child care in Canada. Over the next 11 years, this includes:

$100 million for early learning and child care innovation, which will support new and innovative practices across the country and help to develop more effective services to improve life outcomes for children and their families.

$95 million to close data gaps in order to better understand what child care looks like in Canada, supporting strong reporting on progress made in implementing the Multilateral Early Learning and Child Care Framework and the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework.

Once bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been concluded, it is expected that close to 40,000 children could benefit from new subsidized child care spaces over the next three years. This means fewer parents that have to make the difficult choice between working and staying home to raise their families.

Children in the House and Parental Leave for Parliamentarians

Our country is stronger when we empower decision-makers who reflect the diversity of Canada. Part of encouraging the next generation of young women to run for office is demonstrating that our institutions are modern and family-friendly, and that the experiences they bring to the table will contribute to their success.

The Government is supportive of, and will work with Parliament on, the recommendations put forward in the report of the Standing Committee on Procedure and House Affairs entitled Support for Members of Parliament with Young Children . This includes ensuring that the House of Commons is flexible, compassionate and reasonable in making accommodations for Members with needs that are related to their parliamentary functions, improving work-life balance, providing access to child care and designated spaces for the use of Members with infants and children, and a change to the Standing Orders of the House of Commons to allow an infant being cared for by a Member of Parliament to be present on the floor of the House of Commons. The Government will also bring forward amendments to the Parliament of Canada Act to make it possible for Parliamentarians to take maternity and parental leave.

Supporting Community Women’s Organizations

When women come together, change happens. This is true around the world, and it’s true here in Canada. Across the country, women’s organizations play an important role in raising social awareness and mobilizing communities to change laws, attitudes and social norms.

The Women’s Program provided funding of close to $400,000 to support the City for All Women Initiative, a 36-month project working to improve the economic security of women and girls by addressing the gendered impacts of poverty in Ottawa.

The organization is conducting a Gender-based Analysis Plus to develop recommendations on poverty reduction measures. Key stakeholders are being engaged in identifying strategies to influence policies, practices, services and budgets in Ottawa’s municipal institutions to increase their effectiveness for women and girls.

Created in 1973, the Women’s Program provides funding support for women’s organizations and community-based groups working to implement systemic change through projects at the local, regional and national level. These projects strive to advance gender equality by addressing the following priorities: ending violence against women and girls; improving women’s and girls’ economic security and prosperity; and encouraging more women and girls to reach leadership and decision-making positions.

To support more initiatives that build the capacity of equality-seeking organizations, reduce gender inequality in Canada, and promote a fairer and more productive society, the Government proposes to provide $100 million over five years to Status of Women Canada to enhance the Women’s Program. This investment will increase organizational and sector capacity on a needs basis, allowing organizations to participate in ongoing training, skills development and community engagement, while reducing competition among equality-seeking organizations for funding. This investment will also ensure better funding for organizations focused on vulnerable women, including groups such as Indigenous women, women with disabilities, members of the LGBTQ2 communities, and newcomer and migrant women.

A National Conversation on Gender Equality With Young Canadians

Gender-based Analysis Plus (GBA+) is a tool used to assess how diverse groups of women, men and gender-diverse people may experience policies, programs and initiatives. The “plus” in the gender-based analysis is an acknowledgment that we need to go beyond sex and gender differences as we have multiple identity factors that intersect and inform who we are, including race, ethnicity, sexuality, religion, age and mental or physical ability. Facilitating a national dialogue on the importance of integrating GBA+ in the development of public policies, programs and initiatives is expected to strengthen analytical capacity across the country and provide a means of sharing results and best practices. To this end, the Government proposes to provide Status of Women Canada with $1.3 million in 2018–19 to host a national roundtable on GBA+. The Government also proposes to provide Status of Women Canada with additional funding of up to $7.2 million over five years to lead a national conversation on gender equality with young Canadians.

Engaging Men and Boys to Promote Gender Equality

Gender equality is not just about women and girls. That is why the Government of Canada will introduce a strategy focused on men and boys. The Government will provide $1.8 million over two years to Status of Women Canada to develop an engagement strategy for men and boys that promotes equality and pilots innovative, targeted approaches to addressing inequality. Few governments have a strategy focused on men and boys as part of their work to create a more egalitarian society; investing in this effort would make Canada a world leader in this area.

Men and boys have a vital role in creating workplaces that are free of discrimination and in helping to build a society where harassment and gender-based violence are no longer tolerated. They must be part of the solution. At the same time, men and boys also have gendered intersecting identities and experience inequality, and are not all a homogenous group. This work will recognize that gender is not synonymous with women.

Evidence-Based Policy

In order to properly address gender inequality and track our progress towards a more equitable society, we need to better understand the barriers different groups face. The Government of Canada intends to address gaps in gathering data and to better use data related to gender and diversity. This includes proposing $6.7 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $0.6 million per year ongoing, for Statistics Canada to create a new Centre for Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Statistics. The Centre will maintain a public facing GBA+ data hub to support evidence-based policy development and decision-making—both within the federal government and beyond.

The Centre will work to address gaps in the availability of disaggregated data on gender, race and other intersecting identities to enrich our understanding of social, economic, financial and environmental issues. The work conducted at the Centre will include collecting, analyzing and disseminating data on visible minorities to understand the barriers different groups face and how best to support them with evidence-based policy.

As part of the Government’s commitment to address gaps in gender and diversity data, the Government is also proposing to provide $1.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $0.2 million per year ongoing, to the Department of Finance Canada to work with Statistics Canada and Status of Women to develop a broader set of indicators and statistics to measure and track Canada’s progress on achieving shared growth and gender equality objectives.

Budget 2018 also proposes to provide $5 million per year to Status of Women Canada to undertake research and data collection in support of the Government’s Gender Results Framework. One of the first projects this would support is an analysis of the unique challenges visible minority and newcomer women face in finding employment in science, technology engineering and mathematics occupations. This research will fill important gaps in knowledge as to how to achieve greater diversity and inclusion among the high-paying jobs of tomorrow.

Recognizing the importance of poverty data in evidence-based decision-making by all levels of government, the federal government additionally proposes an investment of $12.1 million over five years, and $1.5 million per year thereafter, to address key gaps in poverty measurement in Canada. This includes ensuring that poverty data is inclusive of all Canadians, data on various dimensions of poverty are captured, and the data is robust and timely.

Skills for Tomorrow’s Economy

Our economy is evolving rapidly, with new opportunities and technologies driving growth and reshaping the world of work. To make the most of these emerging opportunities, governments, employers and workers must work together to ensure Canadian workers have the skills they need to succeed in an evolving economy.

Canada Summer Jobs 2019–20

A summer job helps students pay for their education, and gives them the work experience they need to find and keep a full-time job after they graduate. Starting in Budget 2016, the Government supported an additional 35,000 summer jobs under the Youth Employment Strategy’s Canada Summer Jobs program. The Government proposes to provide an additional $448.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to the Youth Employment Strategy. This funding will support the continued doubling of the number of job placements funded under the Canada Summer Jobs program in 2019-20 and provide additional resources for a modernized Youth Employment Strategy in the following years, building on the input of the Expert Panel on Youth Employment. A renewed Youth Employment Strategy will be announced over the course of the next year.

Improving the Quality of Career Information and Program Results

Better information leads to better outcomes. The Government of Canada is investing in a digital platform to provide the accurate and up-to-date information Canadians need to make informed career decisions, including how much money they can expect to earn in a given field and what skills are in demand by employers. The Government proposes to invest up to $27.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $5.5 million per year ongoing, from Employment and Social Development Canada’s existing resources, to support an Education and Labour Market Longitudinal Linkage Platform. This secure data platform, which will be housed within Statistics Canada, will help to better track and make available important labour market information. The information will be accessible to everyone, and will be used to monitor government programs to ensure they are achieving their objectives.

Making Employment Insurance More Responsive and Effective

The Employment Insurance (EI) program is an important support for Canadian workers, providing temporary income support to people who have lost their job or have to be absent from work for an extended period of time. In addition to improving the design of parental benefits, Budget 2018 proposes a number of measures to make EI supports more responsive to the needs of Canadians who are dealing with major life events.

Improving Working While on Claim

The EI Working While on Claim pilot project allows claimants to keep 50 cents of their EI benefits for every dollar they earn, up to a maximum of 90 per cent of the weekly insurable earnings used to calculate their EI benefit amount. This pilot project is scheduled to expire in August 2018. The Government proposes to introduce amendments to the Employment Insurance Act to make the current EI Working While on Claim pilot rules permanent, providing $351.9 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $80.1 million per year ongoing. The legislation will also include a provision to grandfather claimants who have chosen, under the current pilot project, to revert to more flexible rules of a previous pilot project introduced in 2005. Claimants will be able to continue to do so for up to three years, until August 2021.

While these provisions already apply to parental and caregiving benefits, they do not currently apply to maternity and sickness benefits. In these instances, Canadians who wish to stage their return to work after an illness or the birth of a child have limited flexibility to do so without jeopardizing their EI benefits. Extending the Working While on Claim pilot provisions to EI maternity and sickness benefits will enable greater flexibility so Canadians can keep more of their EI benefits when they need them most.

Helping Workers in Seasonal Industries

For most Canadians losing a job is a temporary, one-time occurrence. The length of time it takes to find a new job will depend on the circumstances of each individual and the local job market they face at a particular point in time. This is why EI provides benefits that vary depending on the regional unemployment rate.

However, a number of Canadians also work in jobs like tourism and fish processing which fluctuates by season. Because EI benefits vary from year to year in each region, this dynamic can cause disruption for workers whose main jobs are seasonal. For those who are not able to find alternative employment until the new season begins, this can represent a challenging and stressful loss of income, especially if EI benefits vary significantly from year to year.

To test new approaches to better assist workers most affected by these circumstances, Budget 2018 proposes to invest $80 million in 2018–19 and $150 million in 2019–20 through federal-provincial Labour Market Development Agreements. In the coming months, the Government will work with key provinces to co-develop local solutions that can be tested to support workforce development. This builds on short-term actions the Government is already taking in collaboration with key provinces to address this challenge this fiscal year. In addition, Employment and Social Development Canada will reallocate $10 million from existing departmental resources to provide immediate income support and training to affected workers. These measures will help ensure that unemployed workers in Canada’s seasonal industries have access to the supports they need when they need them most.

Budget 2018 proposes legislative amendments, as required, to assist workers in seasonal industries.

Improving Access to the Canada Learning Bond

Education and training are the keys to finding and keeping good jobs. The Canada Learning Bond and Canada Education Savings Grant are contributions that the Government of Canada makes to Registered Education Savings Plans (RESPs) to help Canadians save for a child’s education after high school. Through these tools, the Government of Canada is helping to make education more affordable and accessible.

Building on Budget 2017 measures, the Government of Canada is working with the Province of Ontario to integrate RESP referrals into the Ontario online birth registration service. This means more children from low-income families will be able to access the Canada Learning Bond.

Parents will be able to open an RESP at the same time as they apply for other services under the Ontario online birth registration service. Once an RESP is open, eligible children may begin to receive the Canada Learning Bond to help support future studies at a trade school, college or university, or in an apprenticeship program—without any contributions required by their parents or others.

Labour Market Transfer Agreements

Through Budget 2017, the Government made significant additional investments of $2.7 billion over six years, beginning in 2017–18, in Labour Market Transfer Agreements with provinces and territories to help Canadians prepare, find, advance in, and keep good jobs. These investments help improve skills training and employment supports for unemployed and underemployed Canadians. This means that more Canadians—including those who face significant barriers to employment—will get access to the training and supports they need to earn more money, improve their job security and succeed in a changing economy. The new agreements also give additional flexibility to provinces and territories to address their own needs, to expand eligibility and to focus on outcomes.

To build a strong, flexible and resilient labour force, Budget 2018 proposes to:

Give young Canadians valuable work experience, by continuing to double work placements through the Canada Summer Jobs program. To this end, Budget 2018 proposes to invest an additional $448.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, in the Youth Employment Strategy.

Provide information to Canadians about the relationship between careers and skills, so that they are well-equipped to make smart education and employment decisions. Budget 2018 proposes to invest $27.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $5.5 million per year ongoing, from Employment and Social Development Canada’s existing resources, towards creating an Education and Labour Market Longitudinal Linkage Platform.

Legislate the current Employment Insurance (EI) Working While on Claim pilot rules and expand them to EI maternity and sickness benefits, so that workers can maintain their connection to the labour force during periods of temporary unemployment. Budget 2018 proposes to invest $351.9 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $80.1 million per year ongoing, to meet this objective.

Provide an additional $230 million over two years, starting in 2018–19, through the Labour Market Development Agreements to co-develop local solutions to unique challenges faced by workers in seasonal industries.

Progress on Lifelong Learning

Canadians’ overall approach to learning has changed. At one time, Canadian workers could expect to train for a good, well-paying job and then keep a single job through to retirement. Today, workers and employers alike are challenged to keep pace with evolving technologies and rising competition. Canadians today must approach learning as a lifelong commitment, and the Government of Canada is working hard to support this.

The Government continues to make progress on its Budget 2017 commitments to enhance student aid for adult learners. It has expanded eligibility for Canada Student Grants and Loans for part-time students and for full- and part-time students with children, and introduced a three-year pilot project that will provide adults returning to school on a full-time basis after several years in the workforce with an additional $1,600 in grant funding per school year. The pilot will also make it easier for adult full-time students to qualify for grants given their drop in income while they are in school. Canadians will be able to benefit from these measures starting August 1, 2018.

The Government has also made it possible for more youth to gain work experience by doubling the number of placements under Canada Summer Jobs. This has resulted in nearly 70,000 students per year getting hands-on work experience through summer employment and generating income for their post-secondary education. In this way, the Government has supported more youth—many of whom would not otherwise have found equivalent work experience—save approximately one-third of their educational expenses for the following school year, and gain key skills needed for employability.

The Government has also made progress with provincial and territorial partners to promote and expand the use of Employment Insurance (EI) flexibilities to ensure that unemployed adults who pursue self-funded training are able to keep their El benefits. Together, these measures will help Canada's workers to improve their skills and upgrade their credentials throughout their working lives, positioning them to benefit from and contribute to shared economic growth.

Helping Women Enter and Succeed in the Trades

The skilled trades represent high-quality and well-paid middle class jobs that are critical to Canada’s economic growth. Yet few women choose the most highly skilled fields, and those that do can face significant barriers to entry and advancement in these careers.

There is a substantial gender gap in apprenticeship training, with women accounting for only 11 per cent of new registrants in interprovincially recognized Red Seal skilled trades.

This pattern of women's under-participation in higher-paid, male-dominated trades has meant that women are not only comparatively underpaid in the trades sectors, but also wrongly perceived as uninterested in or incapable of pursuing careers in the higher-paid male-dominated fields.

To encourage women to pursue careers in male-dominated—and better-paid—Red Seal trades, and to ensure that women are increasingly able to model leadership to other aspiring female tradespeople, the Government is allocating $19.9 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to pilot an Apprenticeship Incentive Grant for Women. Under the Grant, women in male-dominated Red Seal trades would receive $3,000 for each of their first two years of training (up to $6,000). This, in combination with the existing Apprenticeship Completion Grant valued at $2,000, will result in a combined $8,000 in support over the course of their training for a female apprentice training to become a welder, machinist pipe fitter or any other skilled trade that is male-dominated. Nearly 90 per cent of Red Seal trades would be eligible for the Grant.

The Red Seal Program is the Canadian standard of excellence for skilled trades. Formally known as the Interprovincial Standards Red Seal Program, it sets common standards to assess the skills of tradespersons across Canada. Tradespersons who meet the Red Seal standard receive a Red Seal endorsement on their provincial or territorial trade certificates.

There are currently 56 designated Red Seal trades, ranging from bakers to welders, and agriculturalists to hairstylists.

Red-Seal.ca

Pre-Apprenticeship Program

Understanding the value and promise of careers in the skilled trades, and the importance of these professions to Canada as a whole, the Government of Canada is also proposing to introduce a new Pre-Apprenticeship Program. This program will encourage underrepresented groups—including but not limited to women, Indigenous Peoples, newcomers and persons with disabilities–to explore careers in the skilled trades. Working in partnership with provinces, territories, post-secondary institutions, training providers, unions and employers, the Pre-Apprenticeship Program will help Canadians explore the trades, gain work experience, make informed career choices and develop the skills needed to find and keep good, well-paying jobs in the trades. The Government will provide $46 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $10 million per year thereafter, for the Pre-Apprenticeship Program.

Women in Construction Fund

In addition to the above measures, the Government will be launching the Women in Construction Fund in 2018–19, with an investment of $10.0 million over three years from Employment and Social Development Canada’s existing resources. The Program will build on existing models that have proven to be effective in attracting women to the trades. These models provide supports such as mentoring, coaching and tailored supports that help women to progress through their training and find and retain jobs in the trades.

The Government has also launched the new Union Training and Innovation Program . A key component of this Program is to support women to enter and succeed in the trades. Projects are now starting to roll out and most are aimed specifically at increasing the participation and success of women in the trades.

Getting Into and Staying in the Workforce and Career Pathways for Visible Minority Newcomer Women in Canada

Fawzia immigrated to Canada in 2009 from Somalia, where she was a practicing gynecologist/obstetrician. After spending a year attempting to get recertified to practice medicine in Canada, she decided to volunteer at a local hospital, where she spends her time helping escort patients between departments. She loves being back in a hospital setting but misses being able to care for her own patients one-on-one, and worries about losing the practical skills that are an important part of her profession.

Employment is key to the successful integration of newcomers to Canada, supporting their financial independence and allowing them to make social connections and retain and build job skills. However, newcomers sometimes face significant barriers to finding and keeping good jobs, including language challenges, lack of Canadian experience, a lack of social networks and, in some cases, discrimination. For many visible minority newcomer women, there are additional barriers, including both gender- and race-based discrimination, precarious or low-income employment, lack of affordable and accessible child care, lower language and literacy levels, lack of community and social supports, and limited or interrupted education in their home country. To help reduce these barriers, the Government will launch a three-year pilot to support programming for newcomer women who are also members of visible minorities and provide $31.8 million over three years starting in 2018–19.

Helping Vulnerable People Access Government Funding

The Government of Canada provides grants and contributions funding to organizations across the country that deliver social services to Canadians. These organizations often serve our country’s most vulnerable people, including Indigenous Peoples, newcomers and persons with disabilities, providing them with supports to improve basic skills and language proficiency and achieve foreign credential recognition. However, many of these organizations do not have the organizational capacity to pursue government contracts or maximize available funding opportunities. Recognizing the importance of the work that these organizations undertake, the Government will reallocate $7.8 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, from Employment and Social Development Canada’s existing resources, to help community organizations build this capacity.

Investing in Skills for the Future

Keeping up with future skills needs is a daunting task for Canadian workers, employers, governments and educational leaders. The Government recognizes that innovative approaches are needed to take advantage of emerging opportunities, technologies and trends and ensure that middle class Canadians benefit from economic growth.

Since 2016, the Advisory Council on Economic Growth has provided expert advice to the Government on policy actions that can be taken to help create the conditions for strong and sustained long-term economic growth. In February 2017, the Advisory Council released their second report, calling on the Government of Canada to build a highly skilled and resilient workforce by investing in a FutureSkills Lab. To this end, Budget 2017 committed $225 million over four years, starting in 2018–19, and $75 million per year thereafter, to establish a new organization tasked with identifying the skills sought and required by employers, exploring new and innovative approaches to skills development, and sharing information to inform future investments and programming.

Working with provinces and territories, the private sector, educational institutions and not-for-profit organizations, the Government will launch Future Skills this spring. Future Skills will bring together expertise from all sectors and leverage experience from partners across the country. It will also include an independent Council to advise on emerging skills and workforce trends, and a research lab focused on developing, testing and rigorously measuring new approaches to skills assessment and development.

Figure 1.3: Preparing Canada’s Labour Force for the Skills of Tomorrow

[Figure 1.3 - Text version]

Horizontal Skills Review

From basic literacy and numeracy support to specific skilled trades training to financial supports and work experiences offered to students, the Government provides a wide range of skills programming to meet a variety of needs. To maximize the effectiveness of these programs, particularly in the way that they offer support to workers wishing to take advantage of emerging opportunities, the Government will undertake a horizontal review of skills programming over the next year. In support of this review, the Government proposes to provide $0.75 million in 2018–19 to the Treasury Board Secretariat. This, in conjunction with the Future Skills organization, will provide Canada’s labour force with the information and training needed to meet future challenges and opportunities head on.

Strengthening and Diversifying Trade

Canada’s economic success rests not only on the hard work of Canadians, but also on strong trade relationships in an increasingly globalized world. Canada is—and always has been—a trading nation, and Canadians recognize that done properly, trade can be a positive force for change. It can drive economic growth, create good, well-paying jobs for the middle class, and open up opportunities for Canadian businesses to grow and expand.

To ensure that trade benefits Canadians, and to ensure that those benefits are felt by everyone, the Government is:

Actively deepening trade relationships, through modern, progressive free trade agreements in North America, Europe and new, fast-growing markets in Asia. As a result of the recently concluded Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) and Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), preferential market access for Canadian goods and services abroad has more than doubled, from 31 per cent to 63 per cent of world gross domestic product (GDP).

Making new, transformative enhancements to Canada’s export programs to help Canadian businesses find customers around the world.

Ensuring that trade is done responsibly, in a rules-based way.

Modernizing the North American Free Trade Agreement

Since its inception in 1994, the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) has been a significant contributor to growth and jobs in Canada, the United States and Mexico, improving the lives of workers and families in all three partner countries. Our combined trading relationship has increased three-fold in that time, and is now worth approximately US$1 trillion each year.

Under NAFTA, North America has become the biggest, most comprehensive economic bloc in the world, comprising a quarter of the world’s GDP, with only seven per cent of its population.

Our inter-connected supply chains mean Canadians, Americans and Mexicans not only sell to one another; we build things together and sell them to the world.

While economic gains under the agreement have been positive for all three countries, NAFTA requires an update. It should be modernized for the 21st century, to ensure the benefits of trade are shared more broadly, with more people.

That’s why we are working hard to renegotiate an updated and improved North American Free Trade Agreement that is win-win-win—one that will foster greater opportunity for the middle class, and those working hard to join it, in Canada, the United States and Mexico.

We will always uphold and defend Canadians’ interests and values. The Government of Canada is committed to reaching a good deal.

Europe

The Government is also looking beyond North America, to establish closer trade relationships with large and emerging markets.

In Europe, this has meant the delivery of CETA. As of September 2017, all significant parts of the agreement have been brought into force, deepening our ties with the world’s second-largest single-market economy and providing Canadian businesses with unprecedented access to a market of 500 million people, with a GDP of $22 trillion.

With commitments on labour rights, environmental protection, sustainable development and cultural diversity, CETA represents a model for a modern and progressive trade agreement.

Asia-Pacific

The Government is also actively pursuing trade opportunities for Canada in the fast-growing Asia-Pacific region.

One landmark achievement is the recently concluded CPTPP, which, together with the Canada-Korea Free Trade Agreement that came into force in 2015, will solidly anchor Canada’s place in the Asian market.

The CPTPP, the largest regional trade deal in history, will establish a network of open markets in the Asia-Pacific region, representing 495 million people with a combined GDP of $13.5 trillion. This includes important Asian markets such as Japan, Malaysia and Vietnam, with significant potential for further growth over time as additional countries join the agreement.

In addition to opening markets, the Government worked hard to ensure that the CPTPP safeguards the importance of preserving cultural identity and diversity, and promoting corporate social responsibility, gender equality and Indigenous rights. It also enshrines the strongest labour and environmental provisions of any trade deal in history.

As it pursues new opportunities for trade, the Government will work with key sectors—such as the auto sector and supply managed sectors—to evaluate the potential economic impacts of trade agreements, and ensure these key sectors remain strong and competitive.

Pursuing New Markets

In addition to NAFTA, CETA and the CPTPP, the Government is continuing to pursue other opportunities for free trade agreements around the world, including ongoing exploratory talks with China, and discussions with a number of important partners, and regional groupings such as the Pacific Alliance (Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru), MERCOSUR (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay) and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

[Chart 1.7 - Text version]

As a further accelerator for more exports to Asia, the Government will be making targeted enhancements to its export programming for the region. In particular, this new strategy aims to develop stronger bilateral relations with China—Canada’s second-largest single-nation trading partner—in order to create more jobs in Canada through expanded trade. Canada and China have a shared goal of doubling bilateral trade by 2025.

The Government proposes to provide up to $75 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $11.8 million per year thereafter, to Global Affairs Canada to establish a stronger Canadian diplomatic and trade support presence in China and Asia. This includes bolstering the number of Canadian diplomats and trade commissioners on the ground in China as well as new initiatives to promote Canada’s trade with China and other Asian markets.

Ensuring Rules-Based and Responsible Trade

As we seek to open up markets around the world, we also need to support domestic industries in the wake of trade actions, and need to take steps to ensure a robust rules-based trading system that balances the interests of Canadian stakeholders at home and abroad.

To that end, the Government is committed to supporting and defending the Canadian forest industry in the face of unjustified U.S. duties. The Government proposes to provide $191 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to Global Affairs Canada and Natural Resources Canada to support softwood lumber jobs, including through litigation under the World Trade Organization and the NAFTA dispute settlement mechanisms. The Government will also continue its negotiating efforts towards a durable softwood lumber agreement with the U.S. that will bring stability on both sides of the border.

The Government has also taken steps in recent years, including through amendments to the Special Import Measures Act , to ensure that the trade remedy system is effective and fair. In light of the essential function that the Canadian International Trade Tribunal performs in Canada’s trade remedy system, the Government proposes to amend the Canadian International Trade Tribunal Act to ensure that it continues to effectively deliver on its mandate. In addition, the Government recently reviewed the level of anti-dumping duties applied to imports of gypsum board from the U.S., and has concluded that they are preventing injury to domestic producers while ensuring adequate supply in the market. The Government will continue to monitor this situation to ensure the duties are having the intended effect.

Because it believes that trade is best when it works for everyone, the Government has announced it is creating an independent Canadian Ombudsperson for Responsible Enterprise. This represents a new global standard in promoting responsible business conduct. The Ombudsperson will work to ensure that Canadian firms operating abroad exercise leadership in ethical, social and environmental practices. Funding of $6.8 million over six years, starting in 2017–18, with $1.3 million per year thereafter, will be provided for this initiative.

A Fair Tax System for All Canadians

When middle class Canadians have more money to invest, save and grow the economy, all Canadians benefit. That’s why our first substantial piece of legislation was to restore fairness to Canada’s tax system, by raising taxes on the wealthiest one per cent, so that we could cut taxes for the middle class.

To have an economy that works for everyone, we need a tax system that is fair, and we need all Canadians to pay their fair share. After all, the taxes we pay as Canadians build the infrastructure that gets our goods to market, and helps create good, well-paying jobs. The taxes we pay help to set broken bones, and push cancer into remission. And the taxes we pay mean that if a hard-working Canadian loses her job, she might not have to lose her house.

Delivering the programs and services that Canadians need, while keeping taxes low for small businesses and middle class families, is important to this Government, and to all Canadians.

That’s why in each of its budgets, the Government has taken steps to strengthen the Canada Revenue Agency’s ability to crack down on tax evasion and combat tax avoidance. The Government has also taken action to close tax loopholes that result in unfair tax advantages for some at the expense of others.

Cracking Down on Tax Evasion and Combatting Tax Avoidance

Improving the Fairness and Integrity of the Canadian Tax System

Tax evasion and tax avoidance has a serious financial cost for the Government and all taxpayers. By cracking down on tax evasion, particularly abroad, our Government can ensure that it has the money needed to deliver programs that help the middle class and people working hard to join it. And by preserving the integrity of the tax system, Canada remains positioned as an attractive place to work, invest and do business.

In recent years, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) has implemented transformational changes to its compliance programs. By targeting non-compliance in the highest-risk areas, including wealthy individuals with offshore accounts, the CRA is able to more effectively limit tax evasion and avoidance.

These efforts are showing concrete results for Canadians.

Over the last two fiscal years, the Government reviewed all large money transfers between Canada and eight countries of concern—a total of 187,000 transactions worth a total of over $177 billion that merited closer scrutiny.

Working closely with partners in Canada and around the world, there are now over 1,000 offshore audits, and more than 40 criminal investigations with links to offshore transactions.

The Government is also aggressively going after those who promote tax avoidance schemes, and so far has imposed $44 million in penalties on these third parties.

Thanks to these and all other audit efforts, the Government has identified $25 billion in fiscal impact from the past two fiscal years.

To further combat tax evasion and tax avoidance, the Government will invest $90.6 million over five years to address additional cases that have been identified through enhanced risk assessment systems, both domestically and internationally.

As the CRA has a proven track record of meeting expectations from targeted compliance interventions, Budget 2018 accounts for the expected revenue impact of $354 million over five years. These amounts do not reflect the gain that will be realized by provinces and territories, whose tax revenues will also increase as a result of these initiatives.

To ensure taxpayers understand and meet their tax obligations, the CRA proposes to continue to expand its outreach efforts. These efforts improve tax compliance through a “get it right from the start” approach that educates, informs and supports taxpayers by improving service and encouraging voluntary compliance.

To ensure that Canada’s federal courts, including the Tax Court of Canada, receive adequate support to address a growing and increasingly complex caseload, the Government will provide $41.9 million over five years, and $9.3 million per year ongoing, to the Courts Administration Service. This investment includes support for new front-line registry and judicial staff, most of whom are expected to support the Tax Court of Canada.

Increased Reporting Requirements for Trusts—Beneficial Ownership

Better information on who owns which legal entities and arrangements in Canada—known as “beneficial ownership information”—will help authorities to effectively counter aggressive tax avoidance, tax evasion, money laundering and other criminal activities perpetrated through the misuse of corporate vehicles.

To improve the availability of beneficial ownership information, the Government proposes to introduce enhanced income tax reporting requirements for certain trusts to provide additional information on an annual basis, applicable for the 2021 and later taxation years.

In December 2017, federal, provincial and territorial Finance Ministers agreed in principle to pursue legislative amendments to their corporate statutes to require corporations to hold accurate and up-to-date information on beneficial owners, and to eliminate the use of bearer shares.

The Government proposes to introduce legislative amendments to the Canada Business Corporations Act to strengthen the availability of beneficial ownership information.

The Government will continue to collaborate with the provinces and territories to assess potential mechanisms to enhance the effectiveness of the overall system.

Combatting Aggressive International Tax Avoidance

Strenghtening Canada’s International Tax Rules

The Government is also taking action to fight aggressive international tax avoidance by introducing measures to protect the integrity, and improve the fairness, of Canada’s international tax system. This system includes rules to prevent taxpayers from avoiding Canadian income tax by shifting property income into foreign resident corporations. It also includes rules aimed at ensuring that non-residents pay their fair share of tax on income derived from Canadian sources.

To strenghen Canada’s international tax rules, the Government is proposing measures to:

Ensure that these rules cannot be avoided through the use of so-called “tracking arrangements” (which allow taxpayers to “track” to their specific benefit the return from assets that they contribute to a foreign resident corporation).

Prevent unintended, tax-free distributions by Canadian corporations to non-resident shareholders through the use of certain transactions involving partnerships and trusts.

Update on International Tax Avoidance—Base Erosion and Profit Shifting

The Government is committed to safeguarding Canada's tax system and has been an active participant in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development/Group of Twenty (OECD/G20) project to address both the inappropriate shifting of profit offshore and other international planning to avoid tax by corporations and some wealthy individuals, known as the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) Initiative. The Government will continue to work with its international partners to improve international dispute resolution, and to ensure a coherent and consistent response to fight cross-border tax avoidance.

Strengthening the Controlled Foreign Corporation Rules

Canada has long had a robust set of rules to prevent the avoidance or deferral of tax through the use of foreign affiliates. The Government continues to monitor the effectiveness of these rules and to adapt them as needed, including through the introduction in Budget 2018 of proposals to address “tracking arrangements”.

Preventing Treaty Abuse

Canada intends to adopt new rules in its tax treaties to more effectively address treaty abuse, such as treaty shopping. These include anti-treaty abuse provisions that may be adopted under the Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting or in the process of negotiating new, or renegotiating existing, tax treaties.

Aligning Transfer Pricing Outcomes With Value Creation

Canada has adopted the revised OECD Transfer Pricing Guidelines and has played an important role in developing additional guidance on issues identified in the course of the BEPS project. These issues include the attribution of profits to permanent establishments, the use of the profit split method, and the treatment of hard-to-value intangibles. Additional guidance is due to be published over the course of 2018.

Country-by-Country Reporting

Large multinational enterprises in Canada and elsewhere are now required to file country-by-country (CbC) reports containing information on their global allocation of income and taxes, as well as the nature of their global business activities. These reports are exchanged with other tax authorities with whom Canada has a bilateral exchange agreement or with whom an exchange relationship has been activated under the OECD multilateral competent authority agreement for the exchange of CbC reports. CbC reports are an important tool in combatting BEPS by providing the CRA and other tax authorities with new information to better assess transfer pricing risks.

Harmful Tax Practices

The CRA spontaneously exchanges information on certain tax rulings with other tax administrations. Such exchanges form part of a coordinated international effort to counter harmful tax practices.

Multilateral Instrument

In 2017, Canada, along with 71 other jurisdictions, became signatories to the Multilateral Convention to Implement Tax Treaty Related Measures to Prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (known as the Multilateral Instrument or MLI). The MLI is intended to allow participating jurisdictions to modify their existing tax treaties to include measures developed under the OECD/G20 BEPS project without having to individually renegotiate those treaties. The MLI is a high priority for the Government and an important tool in combatting international tax avoidance. In 2018, Canada will be taking the steps necessary to enact the MLI into Canadian law and to ratify the MLI as needed to bring it into force. Canada continues to expand and update its network of tax treaties and tax information exchange agreements. As one example, Canada will seek to bring into force the tax treaty with Madagascar that was signed in November 2016.

Common Reporting Standard—Sharing of International Tax Data

The recent implementation of the OECD/G20 Common Reporting Standard that allows jurisdictions to automatically exchange information on financial accounts held by non-residents will help advance the Government’s commitment to promote compliance and combat tax evasion. To ensure that the information received is properly leveraged to address the highest-risk population of tax evaders, the Government will provide $38.7 million over five years to the CRA. This will allow the CRA to expand its offshore compliance activities through the use of improved risk assessment systems and business intelligence, and will facilitate the hiring of additional auditors.

Holding Passive Investments Inside a Private Corporation

In October 2017, the Government announced it would lower taxes on small businesses from 10.5 per cent to 9 per cent by 2019, while making sure the small business tax rate was not being used to gain a personal tax advantage for a very small number of wealthy individuals.

Corporate income is taxed at lower rates than personal income to provide businesses with more money to invest, grow and create jobs. Currently, however, some wealthy corporate owners can gain significant tax advantages by holding corporate income inside their corporation for personal savings purposes. Action is needed to ensure that the tax system encourages corporate owners to use low corporate tax rates to support their business, not for significant personal tax advantages.

The Government has engaged Canadians in an open dialogue on tax planning strategies using private corporations, and has listened to their feedback. With respect to efforts to limit the benefits of passive investments held within private corporations, in October 2017 the Government committed that, in any changes it would make, it would ensure that:

Passive investments already made by private corporations’ owners, including the future income earned from such investments, are protected;

Going forward, a $50,000 threshold on passive income in a year (equivalent to $1 million in savings, based on a nominal 5-per-cent rate of return) would be available to provide more flexibility for business owners to hold savings for multiple purposes, including savings that can later be used for personal benefits such as sick leave, maternity or parental leave, or retirement; and

Incentives would be maintained such that Canada’s venture capital and angel investors can continue to invest in the next generation of Canadian innovation.

During the period of consultation, the Government heard that its proposals could be very complex and add significant burdens on businesses. Consistent with the Government’s outlined principles, and consistent with the helpful contributions of many Canadians in the consultation period, the Government proposes two new measures to limit deferral advantages from holding passive savings in a corporation, but in a more targeted and simpler manner than was proposed in July 2017.

Limiting Access to the Small Business Tax Rate to Small Businesses

The first measure proposes to limit the ability of businesses with significant passive savings to benefit from the preferential small business rate. The current small business deduction limit allows for up to $500,000 of active business income to be subject to the lower small business tax rate. Access to the lower tax rate is phased out on a straight-line basis for associated Canadian-controlled private corporations (CCPCs) having between $10 million and $15 million of aggregate taxable capital employed in Canada.

In the consultation, many tax experts and advisors suggested that the main reason for the use of private corporations as a tax planning tool was the significant difference between personal tax rates and the low small business tax rate. Rather than remove access to the refundable taxes as proposed in July 2017, an alternative proposed approach is instead to gradually reduce access to the small business tax rate for corporations that have significant passive investment income. Such an approach would reinforce the principle that the small business rate is targeted to support small businesses, which tend to have more difficulty accessing capital, so they can re-invest in their active business, not accumulate a large amount of passive savings.

Consistent with this principle, Budget 2018 proposes to introduce an additional eligibility mechanism for the small business deduction, based on the corporation’s passive investment income.

Under the proposal, if a corporation and its associated corporations earn more than $50,000 of passive investment income in a given year, the amount of income eligible for the small business tax rate would be gradually reduced. For the limited number of corporations earning that level of passive income, their corporation’s active business income would potentially be taxed at the general corporate income tax rate.

It is proposed that the small business deduction limit be reduced by $5 for every $1 of investment income above the $50,000 threshold (equivalent to $1 million in passive investment assets at a 5-per-cent return), such that the business limit would be reduced to zero at $150,000 of investment income (equivalent to $3 million in passive investment assets at a 5-per-cent return).

[Chart 1.8 - Text version]

The proposal represents an important departure from the July approach. Importantly, the design does not directly affect taxes on passive investment income. Under this proposal, the tax applicable to investment income remains unchanged—refundable taxes and dividend tax rates will remain the same, unlike the July 2017 proposal. No existing savings will face any additional tax upon withdrawal, thereby maintaining the Government’s commitment to protect the tax treatment of all past savings and investments.

The new approach will be much simpler to comply with, will not require the tracking of new and legacy pools of passive investments, and will target only private corporations with more than $50,000 in passive investment income per year or approximately $1 million in passive investment assets (assuming an average 5-per-cent return).

Furthermore, capital gains realized from the sale of active investments or investment income incidental to the business (e.g., interest on short-term deposits held for operational purposes) will not be taken into account in the measurement of passive investment income for purposes of this measure. With the proposed approach, incentives will be maintained such that Canada’s venture capital and angel investors can continue to invest in Canadian innovation.

Limiting Access to Refundable Taxes for Larger CCPCs

The second measure will limit tax advantages that larger CCPCs can obtain by accessing refundable taxes on the distribution of certain dividends.

The tax system is designed to tax investment income earned by private corporations at a higher rate, roughly equivalent to the top personal income tax rate, and to refund a portion of that tax when investment income is paid out to shareholders.

In practice, however, any taxable dividends paid by a private corporation can trigger a refund of taxes paid on investment income, regardless of the source of that dividend (i.e., whether coming from investment income or lower-taxed active business income).

This means that larger CCPCs can pay out lower-taxed dividends from their pool of active income taxed at the general corporate rate, and still claim a refund of taxes paid on their investment income which is intended to be taxed at higher tax rates. This can provide a significant tax advantage. Budget 2018 proposes that CCPCs no longer be able to obtain refunds of taxes paid on investment income while distributing dividends from income taxed at the general corporate rate. Refunds will continue to be available when investment income is paid out.

Targeting the Impact of Passive Investment Changes

In total, Budget 2018’s proposals on passive investments are targeted—less than 3 per cent of CCPCs will be affected, approximately 50,000 private corporations.

Overall, more than 90 per cent of the tax revenues from the two measures would be generated from corporations whose owners’ household income is in the top 1 per cent of the income distribution. Owners below the top 1-per-cent threshold whose corporations are affected by the measures would nevertheless typically have significant accumulated wealth.

The two measures will apply to taxation years that begin after 2018.

In total, inclusive of the Government’s changes to income sprinkling rules, the Government expects to raise from these measures $925 million per year by 2022–23.

Elise owns a catering business. Her corporation earns $100,000 (after tax) in business income each year, and pays out $75,000 as dividends to cover Elise’s living expenses. She saves the other $25,000 in each of the next three years to build up a fund for her planned parental leave. Elise will not be affected by the new rules because the investment income on her savings will be well below the $50,000 threshold, and she does not earn business income taxed at the general corporate rate.

Simon is an incorporated farmer. Whenever possible, he puts aside excess income to manage weather and other risks affecting his livelihood. His goal is to save $500,000. He chooses to save through his corporation in the AgriInvest program to take advantage of matching government contributions. Investment income from AgriInvest is not considered passive income. As such, Simon will not be affected by the new rules.

Claire launched a successful retail business and now uses the retained earnings in her corporation to invest in promising start-ups. She sold her 20-per-cent stake in a growing clean-tech firm, and realized a $1 million capital gain, which she reinvested into two new start-ups. Claire will not be affected by the new rules because her ownership stake in this active business is such that her capital gain will not count towards the $50,000 threshold, and she is actively reinvesting.

Amrita owns a hotel. Her income depends on a number of factors outside her control, so she sets aside funds each year to ensure she can continue to pay salaries and expenses in case of a downturn. She has $400,000 in savings in her corporation that she invests in low-risk bonds. Amrita will not be affected by the new rules because the investment income on her savings will be well below the $50,000 threshold, and she does not earn business income taxed at the general corporate rate.

Saanvi owns a retail store and keeps cash deposits to pay her suppliers and the salary of her employee. She earns interest income on these deposits, which in her circumstances is considered incidental to her business. As a result, Saanvi will not be affected by the new rules.

Louis owns a very profitable private corporation that earns more than $500,000 annually. He has accumulated a portfolio with a value of $5 million, which he intends to pass on to his children. Given his level of savings and level of income, Louis will no longer receive the benefit of the small business rate to fund further passive investments, starting in 2019. All of his business’ income will be taxed at the general corporate rate.

Closing Tax Loopholes

The Government is committed to closing tax loopholes that benefit small groups of taxpayers at the expense of those Canadians who pay their fair share of taxes. Budget 2018 continues the Government’s efforts to make legislative adjustments to ensure that the tax system is functioning as intended. Ongoing legislative adjustments help to make sure that as new avoidance schemes emerge, the Government is able to continue to safeguard the tax system and build an economy that works for everyone.

To make Canada’s tax system more fair:

The Government proposes to improve existing anti-avoidance rules meant to prevent a small group of taxpayers, typically Canadian banks and other financial institutions, from gaining a tax advantage by creating artificial losses that can be used against other income through the use of sophisticated financial instruments and structured share repurchase transactions.

The Government also proposes to clarify the application of certain rules for limited partnerships in order to prevent taxpayers from obtaining unintended tax advantages through the use of complex partnership structures.



<<< source: chap-02-en.html >>>

“ Innovators share … traits we are all born with—curiosity, courage, creativity, and a collaborative spirit—combined with an intense focus on discovering the truth. But discovery is only part of the equation. Equally important is using innovations wisely, for the betterment of everyone.”

Canadians are innovators

We have always understood that better is possible, and time after time we have used curiosity, courage, creativity, and collaboration to create positive change for ourselves—and the world.

This spirit of innovation that Canadians share helped to create the industries and jobs that created and grew Canada’s middle class. Today, that same drive to innovate creates new jobs and export opportunities in growing industries as it transforms jobs in existing ones.

The innovations we make today will create new and exciting job prospects for existing workers, and better opportunities for our children and grandchildren. We ask them “what they want to be when they grow up,” but many of them are likely to work in jobs and industries that haven’t been invented yet. After all, the largest companies in the world today didn’t exist just a generation or two ago.

At the same time, by making smart investments today—the kind that give more people a real and fair chance at success—we can build a forward-looking economy for Canada, one that our children and grandchildren will want to be a part of, in jobs they are qualified for, and excited to have.

As innovators, Canadians seek answers to difficult questions, and look for new ways to apply what we’ve learned. The desire to understand how the human heart works led to pioneering efforts in open heart surgery, and the invention of the artificial pacemaker. Curiosity about how we learn and think led to breakthroughs in machine learning and artificial intelligence—discoveries that help us to navigate traffic with the help of our smartphones today, and in the future will help us get to work and school in self-driving cars.

Everyone—from junior researchers to veteran scientists to the CEOs of the companies whose businesses are leading the way in innovation—has a role to play in building Canada’s future economy. So too does government. Investing in the people and projects that will change our world for the better is not just the right thing to do, it’s the smart thing to do for Canada’s economy.

The Government proposes to make significant new investments to ensure that Canada’s current and future scientists and researchers have the funding and support they need to do their work. Budget 2018 proposes an investment of nearly $4 billion in Canada’s research system to support the work of researchers and to provide them access to the state-of-the-art tools and facilities they need.

These investments are not simply to enhance the status quo. In recognition of the historic opportunity for real change, investments made though Budget 2018 will be tied to clear objectives and conditions so that Canada’s next generation of researchers—including students, trainees and early-career researchers—is larger, more diverse and better supported.

Canada supports its researchers and scientists through three agencies: the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. Together, they support and promote high-quality research in a wide variety of disciplines and areas, from how to make workplaces safer to how to build longer-lasting batteries to finding new ways to help ovarian cancer patients live longer lives.

Federal scientists’ research touches everything from clean air and water to food security to developing drugs and vaccines that play a crucial role in protecting and improving the lives of Canadians. Budget 2018 proposes measures to “re-imagine” the National Research Council—at the centre of research excellence and collaboration, bringing together the best innovative minds from across the country to deliver solutions and breakthroughs that matter to Canadians. Budget 2018 also proposes to invest in Canada’s world-class federal science laboratories and facilities to enable scientists to continue to conduct research that promotes evidence-based decision-making.

To better support Canada’s innovators, Budget 2018 proposes to provide $2.6 billion in incremental support over five years. In addition to new funding, Budget 2018 announces measures that will transform Canada’s innovation programs—making them easier to access and to use, and expanding support for Canadian companies that want to scale up and sell their innovations in the global marketplace. Budget 2018 also proposes new initiatives to make business regulations more efficient and less costly, and seeks to promote greater awareness and use by Canadian entrepreneurs of intellectual property, important assets that can fuel the growth of innovative businesses in the modern economy. Businesses and entrepreneurs in rural areas are important contributors to Canada’s prosperity. Budget 2018 proposes new measures to improve the business environment in rural areas.

Key Chapter 2 initiatives that advance objectives of Canada’s new Gender Results Framework:

Improving diversity in the research community through investments in the granting councils, data collection initiatives, early-career researchers and new gender equality planning.

Helping women entrepreneurs grow their businesses through the new Women Entrepreneurship Strategy.

Supporting the advancement of women in senior positions by publicly recognizing corporations committed to promoting women leaders.

Canada’s Innovation and Skills Plan

Budget 2017 launched the Government’s Innovation and Skills Plan—an ambitious effort to make Canada a world-leading centre for innovation; to help create more good, well-paying jobs; and to help strengthen and grow the middle class. A number of signature initiatives are now underway:

Five innovation superclusters have been announced, selected from competing proposals from across Canada. When small, medium-sized and large companies, academic institutions and not-for-profit organizations come together to generate bold ideas, the results are more good, well-paying jobs for Canadians, and groundbreaking research that benefits everyone.

Building artificial intelligence-powered supply chains (SCALE.AI) in Montreal and the Quebec City-Waterloo corridor.

Promoting next-generation manufacturing (Advanced Manufacturing) in Southern Ontario.

Developing data-driven enterprises (BC Digital) in British Columbia.

Unleashing the potential of Canadian crops (Protein Industries Canada) in the Prairie Provinces.

Maximizing Canada’s ocean economy (Ocean) in Atlantic Canada.

Six Economic Strategy Tables have been established for areas where there is great potential for Canadian businesses to grow and create high-quality jobs: advanced manufacturing, agri-food, clean technology, digital industries, health/bio-sciences and clean resources. The Economic Strategy Tables have identified four key areas where additional support could drive economic growth and create jobs. These include smart regulations, digitization/data, intellectual property and export services. Budget 2018 includes measures to address these opportunities.

Reforms to existing programs and transformational new investments in skills are making a difference for young Canadians and adults wanting to return to school (through enhanced Canada Student Grants), for adult workers who wish to retrain (through better access to Employment Insurance benefits), for young Canadians entering the workforce (through new job and work-integrated learning opportunities) and for unemployed and underemployed Canadians seeking training to find a new job (through skills and training initiatives funded through the Labour Market Transfer Agreements).

The federal, provincial and territorial governments have also undertaken important negotiations on the Labour Market Transfer Agreements . These new agreements, expected to come into force on April 1, 2018, will provide an additional $2.7 billion over six years, starting in 2017–18, to provinces and territories to address skills and training needs, which will allow people to advance their careers.

Innovation Canada was launched in January 2018 to provide a single point of contact for Canadian innovators and entrepreneurs looking to grow their businesses. This innovative interface is an entrepreneur’s gateway to government programs and services (including at the provincial and territorial level). The tool generates targeted results, connecting businesses with exactly the resources they need.

This past year, the Government also launched a range of funds and initiatives aimed at supporting Canadian businesses that want to grow and create more good, well-paying jobs:

The Strategic Innovation Fund , to consolidate and simplify legacy industrial support business programs and attract and support new high-quality business investments.

The Venture Capital Catalyst Initiative to increase the availability of late-stage venture capital to support the growth of innovative Canadian firms.

The Impact Canada Initiative , focused on accelerating outcomes-based funding approaches across government.

The Innovative Solutions Canada procurement program, fulfilling a longstanding request from Canadian companies to help connect with government as a collaborator and first customer.

Investing in Canadian Scientists and Researchers

The world is in the midst of a shift to a knowledge-based global economy, driven by the creation of ideas and their translation into commercial value. This transformation brings with it the prospect of new jobs, and new solutions to some of the world’s greatest problems. But this shift will also bring change—change to the nature of work, the nature of middle class jobs and the skills needed to succeed in them.

Canada is well-positioned to lead in the coming years. Home to a highly skilled workforce and some of the world’s top researchers, Canada’s prospects are bright—thanks in part to earlier investments in science, research and innovation. These investments built world-leading Canadian universities and colleges and created a strong research environment—one that has resulted in global recognition and has succeeded in attracting top talent in important emerging fields like artificial intelligence. The next step is to build on this success, and make Canada a beacon that attracts the very best researchers from across the globe.

[Figure 2.1 - Text version]

Supporting the Next Generation of Research and Researchers

Research expands our basic understanding of the world, generates new ideas, leads to new jobs for our children and grandchildren when they grow up, and helps to build a workforce that is better able to respond to challenges with creativity and confidence. This doesn’t just have economic benefits—it also makes Canada and the world a safer, healthier, better place to live.

In the past year, the Government of Canada received the report from the expert panel on Canada’s Fundamental Science Review, led by Dr. David Naylor. While Canada spends more on higher-education research and development (as a share of gross domestic product) than any other Group of Seven (G7) country, the Review identified a number of challenges that require urgent attention. These include declining funding per researcher and the need to fundamentally shift how, when and where Canada invests—encouraging more global collaboration, fostering more interdisciplinary research, and better supporting research that has the potential to be groundbreaking. The Review also identified a need to focus on the next generation of researchers, including students, early-career researchers, and a science community that looks more like Canada—more diverse, and with a greater number of women.

Since the recommendations of the Fundamental Science Review were released in 2017, the Government has heard the strong and united message from Canada’s research community on the importance of investing in the future of Canadian research—one that supports young researchers and embraces the increasingly international, interdisciplinary, high-risk and fast-breaking nature of leading-edge research.

In response, the Government is proposing measures to make Canada’s research environment more responsive, agile and modern in order to attract the world’s best researchers to Canada and take Canadian research to new heights. Budget 2018 proposes a historic investment in support for researchers, in big data and in the equipment Canadian researchers need to succeed—and lead. This includes more than $1.7 billion over five years to support the next generation of Canadian researchers through Canada’s granting councils and research institutes, and would provide the single largest investment in fundamental research in Canadian history. It also includes over $1.3 billion over five years for investments in the laboratories, equipment and infrastructure researchers rely on every day.

Some of the most innovative and impactful research outcomes arise when researchers step beyond their traditional fields of study and beyond country borders to bring together different expertise and perspectives. Solutions from interdisciplinary and international research can have a profound impact on the daily lives of Canadians and are also the source of innovations that simply do not emerge out of any one field of study or geographic region. For example, Indigenous-led social scientists focused on Indigenous histories and landscapes are working with experts in geochemistry to bring together multiple research disciplines to improve our understanding of the history of Indigenous Peoples in Canada.

Fundamental research often pushes the knowledge frontier to ultimately lay the foundation for new innovations that drive the development of new products and services for global consumers. These investments in the work of researchers also support the Government’s efforts to help Canadians strengthen their skills and ensure that Canada has the talented people needed to compete in a global economy.

Professor Raquel Urtasun is a pioneer in the area of machine perception. A University of Toronto researcher, Canada Research Chair , and Head of Uber Advanced Technologies Group Toronto, Professor Urtasun has developed algorithms that allow vehicles to perceive and understand the environment in three dimensions and in real time. Her work is enabling autonomous vehicles to navigate the streets safely and swiftly, while detecting other vehicles and obstacles on the road and accounting for factors such as motion, speed and traffic flow. A key goal of Professor Urtasun’s work is doing more with less—using fewer cameras and sensors to capture greater amounts of information and detail about a dynamic environment. As a result, her research is advancing the state of the art for industry and helping to make personal robotics more accessible and affordable for everyone.

Granting Councils

Canada’s three granting councils are arm’s-length organizations that provide federal funding for the work of researchers at post-secondary institutions and research hospitals. In Budget 2018, the Government is proposing a historic investment to support this work—the most new funding for fundamental research through the granting councils in Canadian history.

The Government proposes to invest $925 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $235 million per year ongoing:

$354.7 million over five years ($90.1 million per year ongoing) to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC).

$354.7 million over five years ($90.1 million per year ongoing) to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR).

$215.5 million over five years ($54.8 million per year ongoing) to the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC).

To accelerate Canada’s transition to a more modern approach to research, Budget 2018 also proposes to create a new tri-council fund to support research that is international, interdisciplinary, fast-breaking and higher-risk. The Government proposes to provide $275 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $65 million per year ongoing, for this innovative approach, which will be administered by SSHRC on behalf of the granting councils.

Dr. Katherine Lippel is a professor in civil law at the University of Ottawa, where she has held the Canada Research Chair in Occupational Health and Safety Law since 2006. She was named Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 2010 and in 2017 won SSHRC’s highest award: the Gold Medal.

Her research has expanded our understanding about the effectiveness of occupational health and safety regulations. Her seminal work is a SSHRC-funded study showing the impact of applying different compensation systems to people with disabilities. Her findings have been cited by scholars and policymakers around the world.

These two proposed investments would increase the granting councils’ annual budgets for fundamental research by over 25 per cent when they reach their peak in three years time. The proposed funding would provide increased support and training opportunities for about 21,000 researchers, students and high-quality personnel across Canada every year by 2021–22, including: 6,000 top-tier researchers and principal investigators; 3,500 early-career researchers; 8,000 undergraduate, master’s and doctoral students; 1,300 postdoctoral students; and 2,000 research assistants and technicians.

With this investment, the granting councils will be tasked with developing new plans, strategies and targets to ensure greater collaboration between NSERC, CIHR and SSHRC and support for interdisciplinary research, as well as plans to achieve greater diversity among research funding recipients, including improved support for women, underrepresented groups and early-career researchers. To support these goals, the Government proposes to provide $6 million over five years ($0.5 million ongoing) for surveys to collect improved data on researchers, and $15 million over five years to implement programs that support improved equality and diversity in academia at post-secondary institutions.

Canada Research Chairs

To attract and retain leading early-career researchers at post-secondary institutions across the country, Budget 2018 proposes a new investment of $210 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $50 million per year ongoing, for the Canada Research Chairs Program. The purpose of this investment will be to better support early-career researchers, while increasing diversity among nominated researchers, including increasing the number of women who are nominated for Canada Research Chairs. This funding will provide the flexibility to improve the program to meet researcher priorities, and could result in, for example, 250 additional Chairs for early-career researchers by 2020–21, and a sizeable increase in funding provided to early-career researchers. The Government expects the granting councils to target new funding to early-career researchers whose diversity better represents Canada’s population.

Over the next year, the Government will be doing further work to determine how to better support students, the next generation of researchers, through scholarships and fellowships.

Research Support

Professor Deborah McGregor , a cross-appointed Canada Research Chair at York University in Toronto, is advancing our understanding of environmental justice by melding the law, environmental studies and traditional Indigenous knowledge systems to investigate sustainability, water governance and security, and First Nations land management. Professor McGregor, who is Anishinaabe from Whitefish River First Nation, is currently the primary investigator on two SSHRC-funded projects.

To ensure that researchers are provided with the necessary space and support at universities to undertake high-quality multidisciplinary research, the Government will increase the Research Support Fund. This Fund provides universities with resources to cover the indirect costs of research, including overhead costs such as those related to the maintenance of laboratories and other research space that are shared widely and therefore not covered through the granting council’s direct research funding. Budget

2018 proposes to provide $231.3 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $58.8 million per year ongoing, to SSHRC, which administers this program on behalf of the granting councils.

Investing in the Equipment Researchers Need—Canada Foundation for Innovation

The Canada Foundation for Innovation provides access to the state-of-the-art tools and facilities that researchers need to carry out the promising and innovative research that makes Canada a leader on the global stage. This includes the equipment and labs that are right now allowing Canadian researchers to make discoveries in areas like new composite materials for jets and cars, new diagnostic techniques for childhood diseases, and new methods for cracking the quantum computing challenge.

One out of three Canadians rely on medications to manage a chronic condition. Many struggle to stick to the treatment plan prescribed by their doctor. Mary A. De Vera , Canada Research Chair in medication adherence, utilization, and outcomes, examines different strategies to ensure people take their medications as required. By increasing the number of Canadians who use their medications as prescribed, Mary A. De Vera’s research will help improve the health and quality of life of millions of Canadians who rely on medications to manage their chronic conditions, while helping to reduce costs across the health care system.

In order to do this important research, however, researchers need state-of-the-art equipment and good places to do their work. Providing ongoing, stable funding to the Canada Foundation for Innovation will allow the Foundation to provide access to cutting-edge research tools for about 17,500 researchers and 27,000 students and post-doctoral fellows every year.

Budget 2018 proposes to provide the Canada Foundation for Innovation with $763 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to provide the tools researchers need. This includes $160 million for increased support to Canada’s nationally important research facilities through the Foundation's Major Science Initiatives Fund. The Government also proposes to establish permanent funding at an ongoing level of $462 million per year by 2023–24 for research tools and infrastructure supported through the Canada Foundation for Innovation.

The Canada Foundation for Innovation’s Major Science Initiatives Fund supports national science facilities that make international-calibre research possible in Canada. Supported facilities include:

Canadian Light Source, in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, enabling synchrotron-based research in sectors such as mining, energy, life sciences and advanced manufacturing. Recent discoveries hold potential gains in the fight against climate change, including higher-quality fuels from biowaste, and a technique to reuse carbon dioxide and methane.

SNOLAB’s physics research centre near Sudbury, Ontario is helping scientists understand the basic building blocks of our universe. Its facility works to illuminate the mysteries of dark matter and allows scientists to study the impact that deep mines have on workers. SNOLAB has supported a variety of world leading research, including that of Nobel Prize winning physicist Dr. Art McDonald of Queen’s University.

The Canadian Research Icebreaker Amundsen provides a platform for scientists to explore the vast reaches of the Arctic. Discoveries in dozens of fields, from marine ecosystems to human health, have been made possible by the vessel.

Harnessing Big Data

Digital research infrastructure is the collection of connectivity, computing power and storage services needed to support data-intensive and computationally-intensive research. Big data has become an essential tool for progress in science, underpinning world-class research across all disciplines. Improved technologies, such as cloud computing and faster networking, allow for new opportunities to address scientific challenges. For example, medical researchers in genomics can use advanced research computing to analyze genetic sequences to look for DNA-related changes that might cause cancer or dementia. Eventually, researchers may be able to develop personal medical treatment plans for patients based on genetics, age and behavioural data, improving health outcomes. Improved access to essential digital research tools and services will strengthen Canada’s reputation as a global leader in science, research and innovation.

The Government proposes to provide $572.5 million over five years, with $52 million per year ongoing, to implement a Digital Research Infrastructure Strategy that will deliver more open and equitable access to advanced computing and big data resources to researchers across Canada. The Minister of Science will work with interested stakeholders, including provinces, territories and universities, to develop the strategy, including how to incorporate the roles currently played by the Canada Foundation for Innovation, Compute Canada and CANARIE, to provide for more streamlined access for Canadian researchers.

A coordinated and harmonized system that is simple, effective and geared to meet the needs of Canadian researchers and modern research priorities.

A research system that attracts global talent, promotes diversity and supports talent development across career stages.

More researchers and students with access to cutting-edge research infrastructure, equipment and laboratories.

Leveraging the Full Potential of Business-Academia Collaboration

Fundamental and basic research support through the three federal granting councils and the Canada Foundation for Innovation provides the fuel for Canada’s research system. Over the years these institutions have enabled discoveries in artificial intelligence and regenerative medicine, discoveries that will shape the economy of tomorrow and deliver tangible benefits to Canadians.

Canada continues to face challenges when it comes to translating the ideas generated from its world-class research into goods and services that people can use. An established role governments can play is to help bring together researchers and specialized equipment that resides at post-secondary institutions with businesses that have research needs but lack the skills and equipment to undertake their research in-house.

To modernize, simplify and improve the programs that bring together post-secondary researchers and businesses, Budget 2018 proposes to consolidate programming within each granting council in the following way:

The Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council will consolidate the Engage Grants, Industrial Research Chairs, Connect Grants, Strategic Partnership Grants for Networks and Projects, and Experience Awards Grants into a single Collaborative Research and Development Grant program.

The Canadian Institutes of Health Research will consolidate the eHealth Innovations Partnership Program and Proof of Principle Program into a single Industry Partnered Collaborative Research program. The Government will also introduce legislation to separate the functions of the President from those of the Chair of Governing Council at this granting council in order to implement best practices in organizational governance.

Colleges and polytechnics are innovation intermediaries that actively collaborate with small and medium-sized businesses in their communities to solve business challenges. The Government proposes to provide $140 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to increase support for collaborative innovation projects involving businesses, colleges and polytechnics through the College and Community Innovation Program.

Colleges and polytechnics partner directly with local employers to provide access to skilled students and faculty and specialized equipment to solve pressing business challenges through the College and Community Innovation Program. This program allows small and medium-sized enterprises the ability to undertake applied research to develop novel products for the market or to improve production processes that give businesses the edge to compete—all without having to develop in-house research and development capacity. In maintaining close linkages with their local communities, colleges build awareness among businesses of new and best practices and technologies to support local and economic development.

Colleges are also home to 30 Technology Access Centres (TACs) located across the country—innovation intermediaries that provide access to research facilities and connect the expertise of students and faculty with clients and partners looking to solve innovation challenges. In 2015–16, almost 2,000 companies were served by TACs, over 75 per cent of which were small and medium sized enterprises, and close to 1,000 students were involved in TAC-delivered services—representing almost 89,000 hours of innovation-related skills acquisition.

Research Institutes and Organizations

At present, the Government allocates funding to a number of third-party research organizations that study a broad range of topics, from quantum science to regenerative medicine. The government will consider a new approach to determine how to allocate federal funding to third-party research organizations, as advocated by Canada’s Fundamental Science Review. The three federal granting councils and the Canada Foundation for Innovation, for example, use a competitive model to determine funding allocations.

To improve the adaptability and effectiveness of federal research funding, the Government will communicate in the coming year new competitive processes for research institutes and organizations. In the meantime, Budget 2018 proposes to provide support for the organizations below.

Institute for Quantum Computing

This world-leading Canadian research facility focuses on the development of new quantum technologies. The Government proposes to provide the Institute with renewed funding of $15 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, to continue to undertake high-calibre quantum research.

Centre for Drug Research and Development

This not-for-profit organization works in partnership with academia, industry, governments and foundations to identify and evaluate promising discoveries in drug technology. The Government proposes to provide $48 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, in renewed support for the Centre’s efforts to translate promising drug discoveries into commercialized health innovations and therapeutic products.

Rick Hansen Institute

Founded by the “Man in Motion”, this not-for-profit research organization focuses on creating more accessible and inclusive communities and supporting research aimed at better treatment and a higher quality of life for people living with spinal cord injuries. The Government proposes to provide renewed funding of $23.6 million over four years, starting in 2018–19, through Western Economic Diversification, to support the Institute's efforts to achieve breakthroughs in spinal cord injury research and care.

Centre of Excellence on the Canadian Federation

The Government proposes to contribute $10 million in 2018–19 to the Institute for Research on Public Policy to endow a Centre of Excellence on the Canadian Federation, a permanent research body to promote shared understanding of the Canadian federal community. The Centre will undertake research on issues such as the impact of emerging economic and social trends on Canada’s federal arrangements.

[Figure 2.2 - Text version]

Stronger and More Collaborative Federal Science

Federal government scientists enrich Canada’s research environment, contributing to research focused on the public interest as well as the kind of discovery science that breeds innovation. Federal scientists seek to advance environmental remediation, energy and materials science, advanced manufacturing, and health and food safety. Thousands of scientists and the network of federal laboratories—including at the National Research Council—reinforce Canada’s research capabilities and strengths, including through collaboration with post-secondary institutions and businesses.

As the National Research Council re-imagines itself to deliver on the Innovation and Skills Plan, it will be taking targeted action to include more women, youth, Indigenous Peoples, persons with disabilities and visible minorities among its researchers. Targeted actions include ensuring there are no unintended barriers to the participation of women researchers and entrepreneurs in the National Research Council’s programs, as well as increased outreach to diverse groups of Canadians so they are fully aware of its programs and the opportunity to participate.

Governments around the world leverage their own research assets and talent to help businesses undertake commercially relevant but high-risk research, which can in turn lead to successful global companies. The National Research Council has the facilities, expertise and networks to convene strategic, large-scale national teams committed to cutting-edge innovation. Budget 2018 announces a “re-imagined” National Research Council and proposes to provide $540 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $108 million annually for measures that will reinforce its research strengths and role as a trusted collaboration partner of industry.

To catalyze transformative, high-risk, high-reward research with the potential for game-changing scientific discoveries and technological breakthroughs, the Government proposes to provide $150 million over five years with $30 million per year ongoing, to the National Research Council to fund its scientists to work with innovators from post-secondary institutions and businesses on multi-party research and development programs. This research will be modelled on the highly successful Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency in the United States.

To encourage, test and validate transformative research ideas generated by the National Research Council’s world-class scientists, the Government proposes to provide $30 million over five years with $6 million per year ongoing, to the National Research Council to establish an ideation fund to target breakthrough research ideas through a competitive peer-reviewed process.

To enhance collaboration with businesses and improve access to the National Research Council’s specialized facilities and equipment, scientists and technical services, the Government proposes to provide $62 million over five years with $12.4 million per year ongoing, to lower access fees charged to small and medium-sized enterprises and universities and colleges.

To allow for better long-term research planning and delivery, the Government will convert the National Research Council's longstanding temporary funding into ongoing permanent funding by providing $298 million over five years and $59.6 million per year ongoing. Total funding proposed under Budget 2018 will raise the National Research Council’s total annual budget to $1.1 billion.

The National Research Council is only one of the Government’s science-based organizations. The Government has recently announced significant new funds in support of activities in other science-based federal departments and agencies.

Canada’s world-class federal science supports evidence-based decision-making, which improves our quality of life, our economy and our future prosperity. This Government has made significant federal science investments since it took office to ensure that Canada remains a global leader in research and innovation, especially in critical areas like the environment. This includes:

$100 million to support agricultural science research and innovation, with a focus on addressing emerging priorities, such as climate change and soil and water conservation.

$139 million over five years to federal laboratories and other federal assets to advance science, research and innovation.

Approximately $500 million over six years for oceans and freshwater science.

The Government will also build on this renewal of federal science by launching the first phase of an ambitious plan to renew federal laboratories.

Public Services and Procurement Canada will begin the process for the construction of multi‐purpose, collaborative, federal science and technology facilities. Rather than work in silos, this new approach to federal science and discovery will look to bring together federal scientists and science facilities across government including Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Natural Resources Canada, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Environment and Climate Change Canada, the National Research Council and others in order to advance interdisciplinary research on, among other things, climate change, ocean protection, and human health. The Government proposes to provide $2.8 billion on a cash basis ($58 million on an accrual basis) over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $4.5 million per year ongoing. The new facilities will be built to achieve a net zero carbon footprint, and funding will support a new science infrastructure program management office to support the renewal of federal laboratories.

Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory , located in Winnipeg, is a world-leading facility that has helped advance critical work on infectious diseases, including helping to develop one of the world’s first vaccines to combat Ebola. To build on this expertise and deepen the cluster of expertise in infectious disease in Winnipeg, the Government proposes to provide $9.4 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to establish a Centre for Innovation in Infectious Disease Diagnostics, funded from the Public Health Agency of Canada’s existing resource levels.

To advance our knowledge of the Canadian Arctic, the Government proposes to provide $20.6 million over four years, starting in 2019–20 with $5.1 million per year ongoing, to POLAR Knowledge Canada . This funding will support the Canadian High Arctic Research Station (CHARS) campus and enable world-class cutting-edge research strengthening Canadian leadership in polar science and technology. In addition, the Government proposes to amend the Canadian High Arctic Research Station Act to support the transfer of the CHARS campus to POLAR Knowledge Canada.

These investments will be carried out in a way that is more coordinated and agile, creating greater opportunity for collaboration across government and within the wider research system.

In addition, to ensure the Government continues to have access to world-class, independent scientific assessments to inform policy development in priority areas, the Government proposes to provide the Council of Canadian Academies, a not-for-profit research organization, with renewed funding of $9 million over three years, starting in 2020–21.

Reinforced role for federal government scientists, with a greater focus on disruptive technologies.

Better linking scientific research to improving the lives of Canadians.

Increased collaboration between federal government scientists and private sector and academic researchers.

More opportunities for early-career researchers.

Innovation and Skills Plan—A More Client-Focused Federal Partner for Business

At its core, the Innovation and Skills Plan is about building an economy that works for everyone—an economy where Canadians have access to high-quality jobs and where Canadian businesses are well-placed to compete in a rapidly evolving and competitive global marketplace.

The Government currently supports businesses of all types and sizes through a vast and complicated array of programming. As recommended by the Advisory Council on Economic Growth, Budget 2017’s Innovation and Skills Plan announced a review of all innovation programs that serve the business community, in an effort to make the services provided more responsive to client needs, more efficient and better able to promote business growth.

The review took place across 20 federal departments and agencies, making the review the first effort to date to review the entire business innovation program suite.

Programs that are simple, effective and geared to meet the needs of Canadian workers and entrepreneurs.

A single window where Canadian businesses and entrepreneurs can access federal support rather than having to search for help across the entire government.

Services and programs that help Canadian entrepreneurs and high-growth Canadian businesses expand and create jobs.

Seamless help for growing businesses so that they are referred between programs without inconvenience or interruption as their needs change.

[Figure 2.3 - Text version]

As a result of the review, the Government is proposing a series of fundamental changes based on the following three principles:

High-potential firms typically invest more, innovate constantly and expand into the global marketplace. Supported by an executive team with a strong desire to achieve and a high-risk tolerance, high-potential firms play a disproportionally larger role in the Canadian economy in terms of both job creation and gross domestic product growth.

A business-centric lens —Shifting to a focus on business needs allows for the design of a program suite with the main client—Canadian businesses—at the centre. This principle encompasses consolidating programs, streamlining the program suite, and strengthening the single window through which businesses can easily navigate all program offerings— Innovation Canada .

Focus on growing high-potential firms —Solidifying support for high-potential firms as a core commitment of all federal business innovation programs, to deliver on the Budget 2017 commitment to “double the number of high-growth companies in Canada…from 14,000 to 28,000 by 2025.”

Accountability —Putting in place mechanisms to generate program performance data that focuses on firm-level results against indicators such as revenue growth, productivity performance and export intensity to ensure the program suite is delivering value for Canadians.

Following these principles, the Government is proposing an historic reform of business innovation programs to create a suite of programs that is easy to navigate and will respond to the challenges and opportunities facing Canadian businesses today and into the future. Total overall funding for innovation programming will increase, but the reform will see a reduction in the total number of business innovation programs by up to two-thirds.

[Figure 2.4 - Text version]

These reforms are designed to benefit Canadian workers, entrepreneurs, small business owners as well as Canadians employed by large companies over the long term, saving people time and paperwork. Over the next one to two years, changes will be managed to minimize disruption. Implementation details will follow, with some elements coming online quickly and others requiring more fundamental structural changes to be implemented at a more measured pace. All applications, including those from Canadian business owners that have been submitted to an existing program, will be honoured, with all current programs remaining in place until further details are announced.

Innovation Canada – Accelerated Growth Service

Efforts to support high-potential firms will be further promoted through the consolidation of the Accelerated Growth Service and the Industrial Research Assistance Program’s Concierge Service, with the consolidated program and associated funding to reside within Innovation Canada at Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada.

The Government proposes to provide the new consolidated program with $13.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $3 million per year ongoing, for 15 new Innovation Advisors to support Canadian high-potential firms.

The Creation of Four Flagship Platforms

The Government will streamline the program suite in part by designating four flagship "platforms":

Industrial Research Assistance Program

Strategic Innovation Fund

Canadian Trade Commissioner Service

Regional development agencies

Each will consolidate multiple programs and focus on providing the customized support that Canadian businesses need to succeed and grow. Together, these platforms will provide a streamlined user experience for businesses of all sizes, with a particular focus on serving the needs of all sizes of high-potential Canadian firms.

Industrial Research Assistance Program

To help Canadian entrepreneurs and small business owners develop innovative technologies and successfully commercialize them in a global marketplace, the Industrial Research Assistance Program (IRAP) offers flexible funding along with consulting services. IRAP has proven to be an effective resource for growing Canadian companies and innovative entrepreneurs. This program is well positioned to support funding for larger projects above the current contribution threshold of $1 million.

Hassan lives in Regina, where his company is working on inventing a new product to analyse soil composition for agricultural and ecological purposes. The Government will raise the threshold for eligible projects under the Industry Research Assistance Program from $1 million to $10 million, widening the range of financial support available to Hassan, and making it easier for him to access that support as his firm grows, alongside advice to help develop and get his product to market.

To enable IRAP to support business research and development for projects up to a new threshold of $10 million, the Government proposes to invest $700 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $150 million per year ongoing. This funding will support hard-working Canadian entrepreneurs to create jobs as they grow and expand their companies.

Strategic Innovation Fund

To allow for more focused support for business research and development projects over $10 million, the Strategic Innovation Fund will move away from supporting smaller projects to support larger projects that can lead to significant job creation and shared prosperity for Canadians. The Fund’s role in facilitating the growth and expansion of firms and attracting large-scale job-creating investments will remain unchanged. At the same time, the Fund’s role in advancing research and development through collaboration between academia, not-for-profits and the private sector will be expanded.

The granting councils currently host two programs targeted at promoting large-scale business-academia collaborations that have proven to be effective in helping firms grow to create jobs and prosperity for Canadians. In order to modernize these programs and make them more accessible for businesses, the Government will consolidate the Centres of Excellence for Commercialization and Research and the Business-led Networks of Centres of Excellence programs and transfer responsibility for these programs and associated funding to the Strategic Innovation Fund.

Canadian Trade Commissioner Service (TCS)

To help Canadian firms unlock growth opportunities through exports, the TCS will undergo transformative enhancements to simplify the client experience, modernize tools and offer innovative services.

Exports are vital to the growth of our companies and economy. They help to turn small companies into big ones and support one in every six Canadian jobs, with these jobs typically paying higher wages than others. As stated in Budget 2017, the Government has set a goal to push Canada ahead by growing our country’s exports 30 per cent by 2025.

Vancouver entrepreneur Samantha transformed her home-based one-woman clothing company into a flourishing business. With growing sales and brand recognition throughout Canada, Samantha is ready to take her business to the next level and has identified the United States and Australia as key targets. The Canadian Trade Commissioner Service will be modernizing its service offerings and salesforce abroad so it is easier for high-performing entrepreneurs like Samantha to get the support they need to expand into new markets.

One ingredient for success is Canada’s suite of new free trade agreements—important tools for opening up new markets for our businesses. But there is a lot involved for companies trying to capitalize on these opportunities—learning how to do business in these markets, gathering market intelligence, navigating local laws and regulations, and making the right connections.

The Government has a number of programs to help, including Global Affairs Canada’s Canadian Trade Commissioner Service. With over 1,300 trade commissioners in 161 offices around the world and across Canada, the TCS provides companies with advice, connections and funding to help them explore new markets. Other federal partners like Export Development Canada and the Canadian Commercial Corporation offer complementary services, including financing, advisory services, and assistance accessing global supply chains.

To augment and modernize this platform of export support programs, the Government will be making transformative enhancements in the coming year, with a focus on simplifying the client experience, providing targeted support to high-potential firms and offering innovative services.

To this end, TCS transformative enhancements will support:

Amalgamation of multiple trade promotion programs across the Government including CanExport, Canadian Technology Accelerators, Going Global Innovation and Canadian International Innovation Program, under TCS for simpler client navigation.

The creation of a high-impact, agile TCS workforce with strong expertise.

Modernization of digital tools to better serve Canadian businesses, including seamless client navigation across federal partners.

Orientation towards the new economy, with targeted support towards growing Canada’s exports in technology, digital services and intellectual property.

Enhancement of local TCS presence across Canada to connect aspiring exporters with the TCS’ platform.

Efforts to connect women entrepreneurs with export opportunities.

In addition, Budget 2018 proposes to provide $10 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $2 million per year thereafter, to renew the successful Canadian Technology Accelerators program, which helps high-growth Canadian technology businesses take their leading products and services to key markets in the United States.

Over the next year, the Government will continue to refine its export support platform, including by simplifying and improving the client experience across the TCS, Export Development Canada and other federal partners.

Regional development agencies

To foster economic growth in communities across Canada, the Government proposes to provide an additional $400 million over five years on an accrual basis, $511 million over five years on a cash basis, starting in 2018–19, to the regional development agencies to support the Innovation and Skills Plan across all regions of Canada. Of this amount, $105 million will support nationally coordinated, regionally tailored support for women entrepreneurs as part of the new Women Entrepreneurship Strategy. In addition, $35 million of the funding will be dedicated to supporting skills development and economic diversification activities to help workers and communities in the West and in the Atlantic region adapt to Canada’s transition to a low-carbon economy. This will complement the work of the recently established federal task force that will report later this year.

The Government also proposes to extend core funding of the regional development agencies that is currently time-limited:

$20 million per year on a cash basis, starting in 2018–19 and ongoing, to the Canadian Northern Economic Development Agency to continue its economic development programming.

$920 million over six years, on a cash basis, starting in 2018–19, to renew the funding for the Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario to support economic growth in southern Ontario through the delivery of federal programs and services.

The Government will also introduce legislation to enable Western Economic Diversification Canada to collaborate more effectively with provinces in its region of activity.

As part of the broader review of innovation programs, over the next year, the Government will explore ways to simplify the existing suite of 22 programs offered by the regional development agencies. It is proposed that the agencies will place greater emphasis in helping firms scale up, develop new markets and expand, as well as assist with the adoption of new technologies and processes. The agencies could also become the main platform to support regional innovation ecosystems. Under any proposed change, the regional development agencies will also maintain their current functions that support communities in advancing and diversifying their economies.

Raising the bar in food innovation in Ontario: Noblegen Inc. (Peterborough, Ontario) started as an award-winning high school science fair project for one of its co-founders and now creates bioproducts for use in food and beverage development. Four years since it was established, Noblegen is in discussions with five of the largest food and beverage companies in the world. Receiving support from the Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario via its Investing in Business Innovation Initiative, this clean-technology company is contributing to a sustainable supply chain for what we eat and drink every day, while expanding its local workforce and doing business within the community.

YuKonstruct building the innovation ecosystem in the Territories: Since its inception, and with sustained support from the Canadian Northern Economic Development Agency, the YuKonstruct Makerspace Society (Whitehorse, Yukon) has filled a gap in the innovation ecosystem in the territory. Following its initial success in creating the community makerspace in Canada’s North—a collaborative, community-operated, multiuser workspace to provide access to tools and equipment to bring innovative ideas to life—YuKonstruct is now exploring options for expanding its support systems for entrepreneurs. In October 2017, YuKonstruct received the national Startup Canada Entrepreneur Support Award for demonstrating excellence in advancing Canadian entrepreneurship through leadership, innovation and impact.

Placing Evidence at the Centre of Program Evaluation and Design

With these ambitious reforms, to ensure business innovation programing is investing in the right place, supporting high-performing businesses and meeting economic objectives, the Government proposes to provide:

$1 million per year ongoing, starting in 2018–19, to Statistics Canada to improve performance evaluations for innovation-related programs.

$2 million per year ongoing, starting in 2018–19 to the Treasury Board Secretariat to establish a central performance evaluation team to undertake innovation performance evaluations on an ongoing basis, including using the data developed by Statistics Canada.

To ensure that business innovation programming is also contributing to improved diversity outcomes, a national strategy will be developed outlining ways to boost the participation of underrepresented groups in an innovation-driven economy.

Expanding Access to Entrepreneurship in Canada

Entrepreneurs with different backgrounds, experience and global relationships enrich Canada’s innovation system and help to create well-paying jobs for Canadians.

A New Women Entrepreneurship Strategy

In Canada, fewer than one in six businesses (16 per cent) are majority-owned by women, and businesses owned by women tend to be smaller than businesses owned by men, although the difference varies by industry, according to the Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC) based on 2014 data from Statistics Canada.

Women entrepreneurs face unique barriers in accessing capital, supply chains and export programs compared to their male counterparts. Women entrepreneurs may also have a harder time receiving training and finding mentorship.

The Government believes that with greater support, women-led businesses could enter, compete and win on the world stage, boosting economic growth and creating more good, well-paying jobs here at home.

This is why helping women entrepreneurs scale up their businesses is a key part of the Government’s Innovation and Skills Plan. Drawing on recommendations made by the Canada-United States Council for Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs and Business Leaders, the new Women Entrepreneurship Strategy will take a comprehensive approach, addressing critical growth stages and other challenges to better support women entrepreneurs, to help them grow their businesses and to remove barriers to their success.

[Figure 2.5 - Text version]

Helping Women-Led Businesses Grow

In order to grow, businesses require skills, access to mentorship and networking opportunities.

Budget 2018 proposes to provide $105 million over five years to the regional development agencies to support investments in women-led businesses, helping them scale and grow, as well as to support regional innovation ecosystems, including incubators and accelerators, and other third-party programs supporting mentorship, networking and skills development. These areas are consistent with the recommendations of the Canada-United States Council for Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs and Business Leaders, and the Expert Panel on Championing and Mentorship for Women Entrepreneurs, chaired by Arlene Dickinson. Further details on these initiatives will be announced in the coming months.

The federal government is the single largest procurer of goods and services in Canada. In its recent report, the Canada-United States Council for Advancement of Women Entrepreneurs and Business Leaders recommended that Canada and the U.S. increase the proportion of procurement from women-led businesses. In the U.S., the federal government has set a target that 5 per cent of all federal contracts be awarded to women-led SMEs. The Government of Canada does not currently have sufficient data to be able to assess this figure for all federal procurement, but we are committed to filling this gap in knowledge and reviewing potential options.

Moreover, we also recognize the importance of ensuring that women-owned businesses have equal opportunity to participate in federal procurements. Of those SMEs who participate in federal procurement, 10 per cent are women-owned. The Government intends to introduce measures to increase this participation rate by 50 per cent (to at least 15 per cent), in order to reflect the current proportion of SMEs majority led by women entrepreneurs in the broader population.

The Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC) will coordinate a series of boot camps across Canada for promising women entrepreneurs looking to start their business. These bootcamps will focus on enhancing business skills and financial literacy. As well, the BDC will expand its suite of online learning content to better equip women entrepreneurs with the knowledge and tools they need to succeed.

Growing, women-owned firms will also need to find export opportunities. Budget 2018 proposes that the Government will invest $10 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to connect women with expanded export services and opportunities through the Business Women in International Trade Program, with a specific focus of taking advantage of new opportunities arising from the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement and the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Increasing Access to Capital

As women-led companies grow, their need for capital increases. Additional capital can help women-led companies scale into globally competitive companies, and support sales into international markets.

To better support the growth of women-led businesses into competitive, sustainable world-class companies, the Government will make available $1.4 billion over three years, starting in 2018–19, in new financing for women entrepreneurs through the BDC. This commitment is in addition to an increase to $200 million (from $70 million) for investments in women-led technology firms over five years through the BDC’s Women in Technology Fund.

Women entrepreneurs also need access to financing that enables them to take advantage of opportunities in the global marketplace. To provide financing and insurance solutions for women-owned and women-led businesses that are exporting or looking to begin exporting, the Government will make available $250 million over three years, starting in 2018–19, through Export Development Canada (EDC). As well, EDC will support the international success of women entrepreneurs by providing expert advice, including though training sessions. EDC will also partner with women business associations, the Canadian Trade Commissioner Service and the BDC in order to ensure more women-led companies looking to export have quick access to available federal resources.

To support women entrepreneurs in agriculture, the Government will create and launch a new lending product in 2018–19 designed specifically for women entrepreneurs through Farm Credit Canada. In addition, Farm Credit Canada will continue to offer advisory services, learning events and knowledge initiatives aimed at women entrepreneurs in the agriculture and agri-food sectors.

Essential capital and guidance to women-led companies is also provided by Canada’s venture capital market. The Government is committed both to improving the representation of women among venture capital firm managers, and to ensuring venture capital funds are investing in Canada’s promising women-owned firms. A recent report by MaRS and PricewaterhouseCoopers estimated only 30 per cent of Canadian venture capital firms have a female partner, and only 12 per cent of all venture capital partners are female.

The Government’s Venture Capital Catalyst Initiative, launched in December 2017 with the goal of injecting up to $1.5 billion into Canada’s venture capital market, includes a strong focus on gender balance and diversity. All proposals submitted under the Initiative are expected to demonstrate how they will improve gender representation among venture capital fund managers and portfolio companies, and will be assessed on this basis. This gender focus is expected to reduce bias in the investment community, and ensure high-performing women-owned firms can access the capital they need.

Improving Access to Federal Business Innovation Programming

Women entrepreneurs also depend on fair and efficient access to the entire suite of federal business innovation programming, from research and development support all the way through export programs.

To address potential biases, and maximize the opportunities available to women entrepreneurs, Budget 2018 announces that the Government’s coming reform to federal innovation programs will include a universal goal to improve the participation of underrepresented groups, including women entrepreneurs, in the innovation economy.

Enhancing Data and Knowledge

Finally, improved data, knowledge and best practices will support the advancement of women-owned companies throughout the innovation ecosystem, and will allow policymakers to make well-informed, evidence-based decisions. Collecting gender-disaggregated data—data that shows differences between women and men—is important, as is collecting data that explains differences among women. This information helps to guide decisions that will generate better results for more people.

To accelerate the accumulation and dissemination of knowledge, data and best practices for women entrepreneurs, the Government will make available $9.5 million over three years to support third-party proposals through a competitive process, to be administered by Innovation, Science and Economic Development.

Advancing Women Business Leaders

Encouraging corporate diversity is not just about creating equal opportunities for women. It is about creating a competitive advantage for Canadian businesses by making sure that our businesses have access to the talent, ambition, skills and new perspectives that women bring to the job. While there is no shortage of women with senior leadership experience in Canada, change is slow and women remain a minority on corporate boards, holding less than one fifth (19 per cent) of board seats and only 15 per cent of executive officer positions at S&P/TSX Composite Index companies, according to Catalyst Canada.

More women in the workforce inevitably leads to a greater talent pool—and when women hold leadership positions, companies see stronger financial performance, more innovation, and more effective decision-making at the board level. A McKinsey Global Institute study of more than 1,000 companies in 12 countries found that the companies that had the most gender diversity on their executive teams were 21 per cent more likely to have above-average profitability, compared to the “least diverse” companies. Further, a 1 per cent increase in gender diversity in Canadian workplaces is associated with an average increase of 3.5 per cent in revenue and 0.7 per cent in workplace productivity, according to the Centre for International Governance Innovation.

The Government is committed to making gender equality a priority and harnessing this competitive advantage for Canada. This includes the way that the Government itself makes decisions. In 2015, the Government unveiled Canada’s first gender-balanced Cabinet. Since that time, the percentage of women appointed by the federal Cabinet to senior positions has grown, and women now account for more than 40 per cent of these high-level appointments. As a further example of its commitment to gender equality and its willingness to lead by example, the Government has named the advancement of gender equality and women’s economic empowerment one of the key themes during Canada’s G7 Presidency this year.

In addition, legislation recently introduced in Parliament by the Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development proposes amendments to the Canada Business Corporations Act that would require federally incorporated corporations to make annual disclosures to shareholders regarding the diversity of their senior management teams and boards of directors.

Building on this legislative requirement, the Government will further support corporate inclusion by publicly recognizing corporations that are committed to promoting women, including minority women, to senior management positions and boards of directors. In partnership with the private sector, the Government will create an annual award for Canadian corporations showing leadership in this area.

Expanding the Diversity of Entrepreneurs

Canada's Start-up Visa Program provides permanent resident immigration status to innovative global entrepreneurs with the potential to grow their companies in Canada. In July 2017, the Government announced that the Start-up Visa Program, initially launched as a pilot project, will be made a permanent pathway to immigrate to Canada, as of March 31, 2018.

When first introduced, the Start-up Visa was a small, low-volume program. But in recent years, it has seen increased interest from global entrepreneurs eager to come to Canada and grow their businesses. To match that growing demand, Budget 2018 proposes to provide $4.6 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, and $0.8 million per year ongoing, to enhance the Start-up Visa client-service experience by ensuring applicants, private sector partners and immigration officials are able to process applications electronically and more efficiently.

During the first three years of the pilot project, Start-Up Visa entrepreneurs received over $3.7 million in investment capital from private-sector partners, including venture capital funds, angel investor groups and business incubators.

Some of the start-ups created with the help of the Start-Up Visa Program have already been acquired by larger companies—an indicator of success for a new venture. For example, Huzza Media—an online platform for musicians was acquired by Kickstarter in 2017.

Other examples of successful companies established through the Start-Up Visa Program include:

Zeetl—a social media telephony company acquired by Hootsuite in 2014; and,

Lendful—an online lending marketplace that has raised $17 million in debt and equity financing.

Quotes

"Every company launched in Canada with the help of the Start-Up Visa Program has the potential to be a big win for Canadians. Our Government’s Innovation and Skills Plan has identified the nurturing entrepreneurship and growth of start-ups as vitally important to Canada’s present and future economy. Making the Start-Up Visa Program permanent supports that agenda."

— The Honourable Ahmed Hussen, Minister of Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship

"Canadians benefit through the jobs that are created when entrepreneurs come from all corners of the globe to start businesses in this country. By making the Start-Up Visa Program permanent, Canada will attract more innovative entrepreneurs who generate new business opportunities, create jobs and equip Canadians with the skills they need for the jobs of the future."

— The Honourable Navdeep Bains, Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development

Making it Easier for Entrepreneurs and Companies to Do Business

For Canadian companies to grow and thrive in the global marketplace, they also need a competitive and predictable business environment that supports investment. This includes marketplace regulations and standards that support innovation and that allow businesses to better access markets at home and abroad. Budget 2018 proposes a new, modern approach to intellectual property, an ambitious regulatory agenda, and a simpler federal procurement system to make it easier for companies to do business and grow.

A New Intellectual Property Strategy

For Canadian businesses to grow and create good, well-paying jobs, they need the ability to turn their new ideas into new goods and services that can compete in the marketplace. To give businesses the confidence they need to grow and take risks, a well-defined strategy that manages and protects intellectual property is needed.

Budget 2018 proposes measures in support of a new Intellectual Property Strategy to help Canadian entrepreneurs better understand and protect intellectual property, and get better access to shared intellectual property.

A Patent Collective is a way for firms to share, generate, and license or purchase intellectual property. The collective approach is intended to help Canadian firms ensure a global “freedom to operate”, mitigate the risk of infringing a patent, and aid in the defence of a patent infringement suit.

Budget 2018 proposes to invest $85.3 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $10 million per year ongoing, in support of the strategy. The Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development will bring forward the full details of the strategy in the coming months, including the following initiatives to increase the intellectual property literacy of Canadian entrepreneurs, and to reduce costs and create incentives for Canadian businesses to leverage their intellectual property:

To better enable firms to access and share intellectual property, the Government proposes to provide $30 million in 2019–20 to pilot a Patent Collective. This collective will work with Canada’s entrepreneurs to pool patents, so that small and medium-sized firms have better access to the critical intellectual property they need to grow their businesses.

To support the development of intellectual property expertise and legal advice for Canada’s innovation community, the Government proposes to provide $21.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada. This funding will improve access for Canadian entrepreneurs to intellectual property legal clinics at universities. It will also enable the creation of a team in the federal government to work with Canadian entrepreneurs to help them develop tailored strategies for using their intellectual property and expanding into international markets.

To support strategic intellectual property tools that enable economic growth, Budget 2018 also proposes to provide $33.8 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, including $4.5 million for the creation of an intellectual property marketplace . This marketplace will be a one-stop, online listing of public sector-owned intellectual property available for licensing or sale to reduce transaction costs for businesses and researchers, and to improve Canadian entrepreneurs’ access to public sector-owned intellectual property.

The Government will also consider further measures, including through legislation, in support of the new intellectual property strategy.

Intellectual property is one of our most valuable resources, and every Canadian business owner should understand how to protect and use it.

To better understand what groups of Canadians are benefiting the most from intellectual property, Budget 2018 proposes to provide Statistics Canada with $2 million over three years to conduct an intellectual property awareness and use survey. This survey will help identify how Canadians understand and use intellectual property, including groups that have traditionally been less likely to use intellectual property, such as women and Indigenous entrepreneurs. The results of the survey should help the Government better meet the needs of these groups through education and awareness initiatives.

The Canadian Intellectual Property Office will also increase the number of education and awareness initiatives that are delivered in partnership with business, intermediaries and academia to ensure Canadians better understand, integrate and take advantage of intellectual property when building their business strategies. This will include targeted initiatives to support underrepresented groups.

Finally, Budget 2018 also proposes to invest $1 million over five years to enable representatives of Canada’s Indigenous Peoples to participate in discussions at the World Intellectual Property Organization related to traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, an important form of intellectual property.

Modernizing Canada’s Regulatory Frameworks

In its December 2017 report, the Advisory Council on Economic Growth identified three priority areas for establishing an agile regulatory system designed for the new economy:

Catalyze innovation across the economy through regulations that accommodate emerging technologies and business models, especially in high-potential sectors.

Drive coordination between agencies and jurisdictions, both within Canada and internationally.

Promote efficient and predictable regulation.

These priority areas were further supported by the early reports of the six Economic Strategy Tables.

In response to these recommendations, Budget 2018 proposes to provide $11.5 million over three years, starting in 2018–19, for the Government to pursue a regulatory reform agenda focused on supporting innovation and business investment. The goal is to make the Canadian regulatory system more agile, transparent and responsive, so that businesses across the country can explore and act on new opportunities, resulting in benefits for all Canadians. The approach includes:

Targeted reviews, over the next three years, of regulatory requirements and practices that are bottlenecks to innovation and growth in Canada, with an initial focus on agri-food and aquaculture, health/bio-sciences, and transportation and infrastructure, including emerging technologies such as autonomous vehicles.

Canada’s leadership on internal trade at the Canadian Free Trade Agreement Regulatory Reconciliation and Cooperation Table.

Developing an e-regulation system—an online platform modelled on the successful U.S. Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs website Regulations.gov—to engage Canadians on regulation in order to improve the transparency and efficiency of the overall rule-making process.

The Government also proposes to introduce legislation to reduce the regulatory burden faced by businesses. This includes streamlining Canada’s Customs Tariff legislation in order to simplify its structure and administration. This measure will reduce the overall complexity of the legislation, which will ease administrative burden and reduce compliance costs for Canadian businesses and government.

Simpler and Better Procurement

Budget 2017 announced the creation of Innovative Solutions Canada, a new initiative modelled on the very successful U.S. Small Business Innovation Research program. As the single largest purchaser of Canadian goods and services, the Government of Canada has a unique opportunity to support the growth of Canadian businesses. The introduction of Innovative Solutions Canada fulfilled a longstanding request from Canadian companies that need a “first customer” to test and validate their innovations. With this assistance, Canadian businesses that operate in areas of strategic importance to our economy are better able to scale up, create new jobs and find new customers around the world.

To simplify the suite of innovation programs across the federal government, Budget 2018 proposes to consolidate the existing Build in Canada Innovation Program, focused on the procurement of later stage innovative goods and services, into Innovative Solutions Canada.

In addition, Canadian companies have long asked the federal government to improve its relationship with suppliers—to make opportunities easier to find, simpler to navigate and faster to award, with less administrative burden. Government procurement is heavily paper-based and offers limited self-serve options for suppliers.

Moving procurement online is a key element of a more efficient procurement system. It will allow more suppliers to connect with the Government, and make government procurement opportunities more accessible to potential suppliers, regardless of size or geographic location.

To this end, the Government will establish a new electronic procurement platform. This will help Canadian small and medium-sized businesses better access opportunities to work with the Government. Budget 2018 proposes to provide $196.8 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, to Public Services and Procurement Canada to establish this platform.

The Government also recognizes the importance of ensuring that women-owned businesses have equal opportunity to participate in federal procurement opportunities. In this regard, e-procurement will support the Government’s commitment as part of the new Women Entrepreneurship Strategy to increase the participation rate for women-owned small and medium-sized businesses in the federal procurement supply chain to 15 per cent, and efforts to ensure that diverse suppliers are provided with more opportunities to compete in federal procurement processes.

Supporting the Rural Economy

The Government’s Innovation and Skills Plan is about ensuring an innovative, growing and sustainable economy that works for everyone. From coast to coast to coast, Canadians are contributing to this shared vision in communities large and small. In addition to the new funding and simpler programming proposed for the regional development agencies earlier in this chapter in “The Creation of Four Flagship Platforms—Regional Development Agencies,” Budget 2018 proposes the following measures in support of Canada’s rural economy.

Developing the Next Generation of Rural Broadband

The Government recognizes that access to the internet is more than just a convenience—it is an essential means by which citizens and businesses access information, offer services and create opportunities. To reach the most remote areas of Canada, new technological solutions will be required. One promising example is the use of low Earth orbit (LEO) satellites.

Networks of LEO satellites have the potential to provide Canadians living in rural and remote areas with significantly improved access to Internet and wireless services at more affordable prices. LEO satellites, situated closer to the surface of the Earth than traditional high orbit satellites, can receive and transmit data with significantly improved response times, speeding up data services, while maintaining the benefits of satellite technology, including the ability to provide Internet across challenging landscapes at much lower costs than fibre-optic technology. Canada is also uniquely placed with space satellite industry leaders to build and operate LEO satellite technologies, creating jobs and market opportunities around the world. Budget 2018 proposes funding of $100 million over five years for the Strategic Innovation Fund, with a particular focus on supporting projects that relate to LEO satellites and next generation rural broadband.

Supporting Early-Stage Mineral Exploration by Junior Companies

The 15-per-cent Mineral Exploration Tax Credit helps junior exploration companies raise capital to finance “grassroots” mineral exploration away from an existing mine site. This tax credit is scheduled to expire on March 31, 2018. Given the continuing challenges for junior mining companies, the Government proposes to support their mineral exploration efforts by extending the credit for an additional year, until March 31, 2019. This measure will help junior exploration companies to raise more equity and is expected to result in a net reduction of federal revenues of approximately $45 million over the 2018–19 to 2019–20 period.

Protecting Jobs in Eastern Canada’s Forestry Sector

The sustainable management of our natural resources leads to long-term economic opportunity. Research on the spruce budworm, one of the most damaging pests to spruce trees in Canada, has identified ways to protect forests against its cyclical outbreaks. This is critical to support the forest industry and, in turn, jobs in parts of the country—such as Atlantic Canada—where the forestry sector is an important part of the economy.

Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to take action alongside Atlantic provinces and the forest industry, by making available up to $74.75 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, based on a 60:40 federal to provincial and industry cost-sharing basis, to prevent the spread of spruce budworm. Federal contributions will come from Natural Resources Canada. This will allow government, academia, industry and other stakeholders to continue to work together to protect our forests and support the economy.

Renewing Canada’s Network of Small Craft Harbours

Safe and accessible small craft harbours are essential to Canada’s fisheries industry as well as its coastal communities. Expanding fisheries operations and the increasing size of fishing vessels require deeper and wider harbours. Budget 2018 proposes to provide $250 million on a cash basis over two years, starting in 2018–19, to Fisheries and Oceans Canada to renew its network of small craft harbours and work with municipalities where investments and divestitures can enhance local communities. Budget 2018 investments allow the Government to support, for example:

Building additional berthing space to help address overcrowding in Charlottetown in Southern Labrador.

Extending the seawall to protect the fisheries industry from the full force of waves at the entrance of the harbour in Sainte-Thérèse-de Gaspé, Quebec.

Rehabilitating the east and west piers of Port Dalhousie in St. Catharines, Ontario.

Making improvements to enhance the safety of moorage facilities for the fisheries industry and other harbour users in Port Hardy and Powell River in British Columbia.



<<< source: chap-03-en.html >>>

“We need to get to a place where Indigenous Peoples in Canada are in control of their own destiny, making their own decisions about their future.”

It is unacceptable that any person living in Canada should be unable to safely drink the water that comes out of their taps. No person should be forced to live in overcrowded and unsafe homes, and no young person should have to move far from home to get a good education. Yet, all over Canada, these are exactly the challenges faced by Indigenous Peoples.

Indigenous Peoples, non-Indigenous Canadians and the Government agree that this must change.

Together we are working hard to improve the quality of life for First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples, as we forge a new relationship—one based on recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership. Budgets 2016 and 2017 began this important work, with investments of more than $11.8 billion to help address areas of critical need in Indigenous communities, such as housing, child and family services, education, health care and access to clean drinking water.

These budgets also included investments to lay the groundwork for a renewed relationship based on recognition and implementation of Indigenous rights. Specifically, Budget 2017 included support for:

New permanent bilateral processes with First Nations, Inuit and the Metis Nation to identify each community’s distinct priorities and how we will work together to develop solutions.

The launch of a Working Group of Ministers to conduct a review of federal laws, policies and operational practices to ensure that Canada is meeting its constitutional obligations with respect to Aboriginal and treaty rights, adhering to international human rights standards, including the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, and supporting the implementation of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada’s Calls to Action.

To achieve truly transformational change, however, further investments are needed—to support capacity-building in Indigenous communities, to advance self-determination and self-government, and to build a better future for Indigenous Peoples and for all Canadians.

Budget 2018 takes further steps to improve the quality of life of Indigenous Peoples in Canada and supports a new approach to recognizing and implementing Indigenous rigshts. The Government proposes to invest an additional $5 billion over five years to ensure that Indigenous children and families have an equal chance to succeed in life, to build the capacity of Indigenous governments, and to accelerate self-determination and self-government agreements with Indigenous Peoples based on the recognition and implementation of rights.

Helping Indigenous Peoples succeed is not only the right thing to do, but a smart investment. The Centre for the Study of Living Standards estimates that if we close the education and labour market gaps for Indigenous Peoples in Canada by 2031, Canada’s gross domestic product could gain $36 billion that year.

In 2017, the Government signalled its intention to dismantle old colonial structures, including replacing Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada with two new departments to better serve Indigenous Peoples while the important work of advancing rights recognition and greater self determination goes on.

It is the Government’s intention, through Crown Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, to:

Accelerate progress on existing rights and recognition tables to identify priorities for individual Indigenous communities.

Ensure we implement the spirit and intent of existing and future agreements with Indigenous Peoples.

Work with Indigenous Peoples to support them in their efforts to rebuild and reconstitute their nations.

Enable Indigenous Peoples to build capacity that supports implementation of their vision of self-determination.

Increase the number of comprehensive modern treaties and new self-government agreements in a manner that reflects a recognition of rights approach and reconciliation.

Lead the whole-of-government approach to the renewal of a nation-to-nation, Inuit–Crown and government-to-government relationship with Indigenous Peoples, including implementing the permanent bilateral processes, advancing distinctions-based, co-developed policy, and improving the Government’s capacity to consider and respond to the unique realities of Indigenous Peoples in Canada.

Through Indigenous Services Canada, the Government will work with Indigenous partners to:

Close the quality of life gap between Indigenous Peoples and non-Indigenous people.

Improve the quality of distinctions-based services for First Nations, Inuit and the Metis Nation, including on issues of housing, education, health care and access to clean drinking water.

Work with Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada in support of the ultimate goal of ensuring that the design, delivery and control of services are led by Indigenous Peoples for Indigenous Peoples.

Budget 2018 proposes investments to help improve the quality of life of Indigenous Peoples and close the gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous communities in areas such as support for families, health care and job opportunities.

These investments will:

Provide more funding to support the well-being of Indigenous children in foster care, enhance prevention resources such as support for single-mothers, and promote family reunification efforts, to reduce the number of children taken into care.

Provide funding for existing health programs, as well as greater support for distinctions-based health care data collection and delivery, and for the expansion of Indigenous health systems that are increasingly delivered and controlled by and for Indigenous Peoples.

Help address acute health issues—such as tuberculosis in Inuit communities and opioid addiction in First Nations communities.

Address gaps in employment and economic opportunities by investing in skills development and training that will help Indigenous Peoples find lasting employment.

Ensure access to clean drinking water on reserve to prevent future long-term drinking water advisories, and invest in First Nations’ capacity to operate and maintain their water systems.

Reduce overcrowding and housing in disrepair by investing in the repair and construction of housing units in First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation communities.

The Government of Canada recognizes that a distinctions-based approach is needed to ensure that the unique rights, priorities and circumstances of First Nations, Inuit and the Métis Nation are acknowledged, affirmed and implemented.

To meet this need, Budget 2018 includes distinctions-based investments in priority areas identified by First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation partners. The forthcoming Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework, currently being co-developed with Indigenous partners, will also be supported by dedicated funding to meet the unique needs of First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation children and families.

Key Chapter 3 initiatives that advance objectives of Canada’s new Gender Results Framework:

Keeping Indigenous children and families together.

Making progress to close gaps in Indigenous health outcomes.

Promoting equal access to training and jobs for Indigenous women.

Achieving Better Results for Indigenous Peoples

Indigenous Peoples in Canada are more likely than other Canadians to live in poverty and fall behind on measures of quality of life. The investments in Budget 2018 continue our focus on closing the gap between the living conditions of Indigenous and non-Indigenous people.

Ensuring That Indigenous Children Are Safe and Supported Within Their Communities

For all families and communities, there is no greater priority than ensuring the safety, security and well-being of their children. Indigenous children under the age of 14 make up 7.7 per cent of all children in Canada, but they represent more than half of all children in foster care. This means that Indigenous children have a much higher chance of being separated from their families, communities and cultures. This needs to change.

The Government is committed to fully implementing the orders of the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal. To address the funding pressures facing child and family service agencies, while also increasing prevention resources for communities so that children are safe and families can stay together, Budget 2018 proposes to provide more than $1.4 billion in new funding over six years, starting in 2017–18, for First Nations Child and Family Services.

The Government will continue to work with First Nations, Inuit and the Metis Nation, as well as other partners, to advance the reforms to child and family services that are needed and develop Indigenous-led solutions that put the well-being of children first.

Clean and Safe Drinking Water on Reserve

The Government is firm on its commitment: all long-term drinking water advisories on public water systems on reserve will be lifted by March 2021.

Budget 2016 proposed a significant investment of $1.8 billion over five years to support water and wastewater infrastructure in First Nations communities. With the help of these investments, 349 water-related projects in 275 communities have been supported so far. The work done in partnership between First Nations and the Government is delivering tangible results for communities. As of February 12, 2018, 52 long-term drinking water advisories on public water systems have been lifted. For example:

The Pic Mobert First Nation in Ontario worked with Indigenous Services Canada to build a new water treatment plant that allowed the community to lift a long-term drinking water advisory affecting 295 residents.

The Kahkewistahaw First Nation in Saskatchewan completed upgrades and repairs to its water treatment plant, allowing it to provide clean drinking water to its residents for the first time in more than two years.

Budget 2018 builds on prior investments and reaffirms the Government’s commitment by proposing to provide an additional $172.6 million over three years, beginning in 2018–19, to improve access to clean and safe drinking water on reserve.

This funding will support initiatives to accelerate the pace of construction and renovation of affected water systems, which will result in 25 additional projects being completed by 2020 rather than 2021.

New investments will also support repairs to high-risk water systems to prevent additional long-term drinking water advisories. In addition, these new investments will assist efforts to recruit, train and retain water operators, and establish innovative First Nations-led service delivery models.

Despite having a generally higher degree of educational attainment than Indigenous men, Indigenous women tend to have lower incomes and poorer job prospects.

Services supported by the Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program, such as child care, will ensure that Indigenous women have equal access to skills development and training opportunities and are able to contribute more fully to the economic success of their communities.

Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program

Indigenous Peoples are less likely to be employed than non-Indigenous Canadians, and those who do work typically earn less. To help close the employment and earning gaps between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people, Budget 2018 proposes to invest $2 billion over five years, and $408.2 million per year ongoing, to support the creation of a new Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program, which will replace the Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy. This includes incremental investments of $447 million over five years, and $99.4 million per year ongoing, and a stronger focus on training for higher-quality, better-paying jobs rather than rapid re-employment. This additional funding will assist approximately 15,000 more clients gain greater skills and find jobs that will support their long-term career success.

The Government has consulted with, and heard from, Indigenous partners on the importance of a distinctions-based approach that recognizes the unique needs of First Nations, Inuit and the Métis Nation. To that end, the new program will provide:

$1.1 billion over five years, and $235.7 million per year ongoing, for a First Nations stream.

$325 million over five years, and $67 million per year ongoing, for a Métis Nation stream.

$161.2 million over five years, and $32.6 million per year ongoing, for an Inuit stream.

$213.4 million over five years, and $45.2 million per year ongoing, for an urban/non-affiliated stream.

These investments will support Indigenous Peoples in developing employment skills and pursuing training for high-quality jobs.

Support for Distinctions-Based Housing Strategies

Safe, adequate and affordable housing gives people a sense of security and helps build strong communities. But for too many Indigenous Peoples, this remains out of reach. Nearly one in five Indigenous people live in housing that is in need of major repairs, and one in five also live in housing that is overcrowded. Access to adequate and affordable housing is a particular challenge for Indigenous women. In 2011, 27 per cent of Indigenous women lived in core housing need compared to 13 per cent of Indigenous men. [1] Lack of adequate housing can compound barriers to security, employment and overall well-being, which tend to disproportionately affect Indigenous women.

Indigenous leaders have told the Government that when it comes to housing in First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation communities, the best approach is one that respects the distinct needs of each Indigenous group. The Government agrees. As announced in Canada’s first-ever National Housing Strategy, the Government and Indigenous partners are working together to improve housing conditions over the long term and to ensure that Indigenous Peoples have greater control over housing in their communities.

Through investments made in Budget 2017 and Budget 2018, the Government proposes dedicated funding to support the successful implementation of each of the distinctions-based housing strategies, including:

An additional $600 million over three years to support housing on reserve as part of a 10-year First Nations Housing Strategy that is being developed with First Nations.

$400 million over 10 years to support an Inuit-led housing plan in the Inuit regions of Nunavik, Nunatsiavut and Inuvialuit. This is in addition to the $240 million over 10 years announced in Budget 2017 to support housing in Nunavut, where additional funding was provided for Inuit housing.

$500 million over 10 years to support the Métis Nation’s housing strategy.

Indigenous Health: Keeping Families Healthy in Their Communities

There are significant gaps in health outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people. Infant mortality rates of First Nations and Inuit children are up to three times higher, diabetes rates are up to four times higher, and suicide rates among First Nations youth are between five and seven times higher. This gap in health outcomes can be narrowed, and providing access to quality health care close to home is an essential part of that change.

To keep Indigenous families healthy, Budget 2018 proposes to invest $1.5 billion over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $149 million per year ongoing, as follows:

$498 million, with $97.6 million per year ongoing, to sustain access to critical medical care and services, including 24/7 nursing services in 79 remote and isolated First Nations communities.

$200 million, with $40 million per year ongoing, to enhance the delivery of culturally appropriate addictions treatment and prevention services in First Nations communities with high needs.

$235 million to work with First Nations partners to transform First Nations health systems by expanding successful models of self-determination so that health programs and services are developed, delivered and controlled by and for First Nations. This investment will also support access to quality and First Nations-controlled health care in remote and isolated James Bay communities as part of the Weeneebayko Area Health Integration Framework Agreement.

$490 million over two years to preserve access to medically necessary health benefits and services through the Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.

$109 million over 10 years, with $6 million per year ongoing, to respond to high rates of tuberculosis in Inuit communities, and develop a better understanding of the unique health needs of Inuit peoples through the co-creation of a distinct Inuit Health Survey.

$6 million over five years to support the Métis Nation in gathering health data and developing a health strategy.

Meaningful improvements in Indigenous health outcomes will only be achieved if there are fundamental changes in the design, delivery and control of health services. Simply put, health systems have to be more responsive to community needs. Through Budget 2018, the Government will provide a contribution to the Province of Ontario to build a new hospital and ambulatory care facility to serve the health needs of remote and isolated James Bay communities, such as Attawapiskat, Fort Albany and Kashechewan. This contribution is part of Canada’s commitment under the Weeneebayko Area Health Integration Framework Agreement to continue the process of devolving health service delivery to the Nishawbe Aski Nation. The creation of new health care infrastructure in this area will give people in these communities better access to quality public health, mental health and long-term care closer to home—and under First Nations control.

Supporting Inuit Priorities

The Government of Canada is committed to a renewed Inuit-Crown relationship. The Inuit-Crown Partnership Committee is an important vehicle where the Government of Canada and Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami are working together to advance shared priorities. Through Budget 2018, the Government is providing $509.5 million over 10 years to make progress in the areas identified through the Inuit-Crown Partnership Committee such as health and wellness, skills and training, and housing, including:

$27.5 million over five years to eliminate tuberculosis in Inuit Nunangat. Among Inuit, the reported rate of active tuberculosis in 2015 was over 270 times higher than the rate among the Canadian-born, non-Indigenous population. Through Budget 2018, the Government will support Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami’s Inuit-specific approach to tuberculosis elimination, which includes enhanced community-wide prevention, detection, screening, treatment, communications and awareness, and addressing social determinants of health.

$82 million over 10 years, with $6 million per year ongoing, for the co-creation of a permanent Inuit Health Survey. Funding will build capacity in Inuit communities to develop and collect survey information and support Inuit self-determination in setting the research agenda in their regions and communities.

$400 million over 10 years for housing in the Inuit regions of Nunavik, Nunatsiavut and Inuvialuit to help address significant overcrowding and repair needs in Inuit communities.

Budget 2018 proposes to invest $161.2 million over five years in the Inuit stream of the Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program, which supports employment services, skills development and job training.

In addition, the Government proposes to amend the Nunavut Act to resolve the legal gap for the Government of Nunavut to manage wildlife pertaining to Indigenous harvesting for game food.

Supporting Métis Nation Priorities

The Government of Canada is deeply committed to renewing the relationship with the Métis Nation based on recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership. Reflecting commitments in the Canada–Métis Nation Accord—which outlines ways in which Canada and the Métis National Council will work together to set priorities and develop policy in areas of shared interest—Budget 2018 proposes to invest $516 million over 10 years, including $500 million over 10 years to support a Métis Nation housing strategy, $10 million in 2018–19 to support Métis Nation post-secondary education, and $6 million over five years to support the Métis Nation in gathering health data and developing a health strategy. Furthermore, as announced elsewhere in this chapter, Budget 2018 also proposes to invest $325 million in the Métis Nation stream of the Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program, which supports employment services, skills development and job training.

These investments in Métis Nation priorities reflect the Government’s commitment to apply a greater distinctions-based lens to Indigenous funding decisions and support the Métis Nation’s vision of self-determination.

Increased Health Supports for Survivors of Indian Residential Schools and Their Families

The Indian Residential School Settlement was intended to redress harm caused to students of residential schools and their families. Implementation began in September 2007 and is expected to wind down over the next few years.

For many survivors of residential schools and their families, the healing process has been long and very difficult. In light of this, the Settlement Agreement committed to providing survivors and their families with mental health and emotional support services to help them as they heal. Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to provide $248.6 million over three years, starting in 2018–19, for services, including mental health and emotional supports to survivors and their families for the duration of the Indian Residential School Settlement.

Supporting the Gord Downie & Chanie Wenjack Fund

The Gord Downie & Chanie Wenjack Fund is part of Gord Downie’s legacy and embodies his commitment, and that of his family, to improving the lives of Indigenous Peoples. Developed in collaboration with the Wenjack family, the goal of the Fund is to continue the conversation that began with Chanie Wenjack’s residential school story. In particular, the Fund supports activities to promote reconciliation, build awareness, and educate Canadians about residential schools and the legacy that this experience still has for many Indigenous Peoples today.

The Fund supports tangible projects that encourage cross-cultural dialogue and awareness among Indigenous and non-Indigenous communities and that create places and spaces dedicated to reconciliation. The Fund also partners with educators and Indigenous communities to develop curricula for Canadian schools that accurately describe Indigenous history.

To support these reconciliation initiatives across Canada, Budget 2018 proposes to provide $5 million in 2018–19 to support the Gord Downie & Chanie Wenjack Fund.

Creating a More Responsive Income Assistance Program That Addresses the Needs of First Nations Communities

Since its inception in 1964, the on-reserve Income Assistance program has remained largely unchanged. The Government proposes to invest $8.5 million over two years to work with First Nations to understand how to make the program more responsive to the needs of individuals and families on reserve and to identify the supports required to help individuals better transition from income assistance to employment and education.

While this work is being done, the Government proposes to provide $78.4 million over two years for case management services to help individuals transition from income assistance to employment and education.

Supporting Indigenous History and Heritage

The Government has committed to implementing the 94 Calls to Action of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. Call to Action 79 calls for historical commemoration activities, and recognition and acknowledgement of the contributions that Indigenous Peoples have made to Canada’s history. In response to this call, Budget 2018 proposes to provide $23.9 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to Parks Canada to integrate Indigenous views, history and heritage into the national parks, marine conservation areas and historic sites managed by that agency.

Indigenous Sport

Indigenous youth are far more likely than their non-Indigenous peers to be in care, not to complete high school, to be unemployed and to suffer from poor health.

Community-led sport can be a powerful tool to support Indigenous youth. It promotes social inclusion, builds self-esteem, strengthens Indigenous identity, instills a sense of pride and reduces the risks of suicide. Indigenous boys are more likely than Indigenous girls to participate in sport, with adolescence being a pivotal time for predicting whether or not girls will participate in sports as they grow older. Girls who play sports at a young age are more likely to be physically active as adults. Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to invest $47.5 million over five years, and $9.5 million per year ongoing, to expand the use of sport for social development in more than 300 Indigenous communities. This initiative will help to scale up a highly successful model developed by Right To Play that has led nearly 90 per cent of participants to have a more positive attitude toward school and a greater sense of identity. As this initiative is implemented, the Government will look for opportunities to profile excellence among Indigenous youth in sport.

Supporting the Expansion of the First Nations Land Management Act and the Successful Participation of First Nations Under the Act

The First Nations Land Management Act and associated Land Management Regime empower First Nations to exercise their jurisdiction by opting out of antiquated Indian Act provisions related to land management and replacing them with their own laws. This way, communities can manage their reserve land, resources and environment according to their cultural values and priorities. They also allow communities to process lands transactions more quickly and present a more attractive climate for investors, which helps create jobs and spur economic development.

Allow First Nations to exercise their inherent right to self-determination by creating their own laws related to land management.

Support the capacity of First Nations to develop their own matrimonial real property laws.

Create economic opportunities for First Nations through self-management of reserve lands, environmental protection and natural resources.

Provide legal protection from family violence to women and children living on reserve.

Close gaps in the administration of justice by providing targeted training to law enforcement officers, members of the judiciary, court workers, and social and family services officers.

To support the expansion of the First Nations Land Management Act and the successful participation of First Nations under the Act, Budget 2018 proposes to invest $143.5 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, and $19 million per year ongoing. This funding will allow an additional 50 First Nations to enter into the Land Management Regime, while providing pre readiness support and capacity development to ensure their successful participation.

Renewing the Matrimonial Real Property Implementation Support Program

The Family Homes on Reserves and Matrimonial Interests or Rights Act was established in 2013 to provide protection for individuals living on reserve in cases where a relationship ends and property division is required. The law also includes special powers to deal with cases of family violence, such as granting emergency protection orders prohibiting a spouse or common-law partner from accessing the family home.

To support implementation of the law, the Matrimonial Real Property Implementation Support Program was created. The Program supports First Nations in developing their own community-specific matrimonial real property laws, and provides targeted training and awareness activities to law enforcement officers and members of the judiciary.

Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to provide $5.5 million over two years to continue the activities of the Matrimonial Real Property Implementation Support Program. In addition, this funding will support new and more targeted training and awareness activities, such as the development of alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, to respond to gaps in the administration of justice.

The Family Homes on Reserves and Matrimonial Interests or Rights Act helps ensure that individuals on reserve, particularly women and children, have the same rights and protections as other Canadians. For example, Theresa lived in a common-law relationship in her First Nation community for 15 years when she separated from her partner. She contributed to building the home and made payments on the housing loan, but her name was not on the Certificate of Possession. Upon separation, she and her children were asked to leave the home she helped build for 15 years. Under the regime now in force, she would be entitled to half of the value of the interest in the family home, which would help ensure the safety and stability of her family following her separation.

Rights and Self-Determination

The Government of Canada is committed to building a renewed relationship with Indigenous Peoples based on the recognition of rights, respect, cooperation and partnership. To that end, the Government launched a major review and reform of its laws, policies and operational practices to help ensure that the Crown is:

Meeting its constitutional obligations with respect to Aboriginal and treaty rights.

Adhering to international human rights standards, including the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.

Supporting the implementation of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada’s Calls to Action.

To further this commitment, the Prime Minister recently announced a national engagement process to create a Recognition and Implementation of Rights Framework. It is the Government’s intention that, with this Framework, Indigenous rights will be recognized from the outset, and the focus of the Government’s work with First Nations, Inuit and the Métis Nation will be on how those rights are implemented and exercised moving forward.

Supporting the Recognition and Implementation of Rights and Self-Determination

While Canada has advanced a number of modern treaties and agreements since the 1970s, the pace of progress in many cases has been slow and uneven. Negotiations can take a decade or more, and Indigenous communities are forced to take on debt in order to participate.

Budget 2018 outlines new steps the Government will take to increase the number of modern treaties and self-determination agreements in a manner that reflects a recognition of rights approach. These changes, along with the new approach brought forward through the Recognition of Indigenous Rights and Self-Determination negotiation process, will shorten the time it takes to reach new treaties and agreements, at a lower cost to all parties.

As part of this new approach, the Government of Canada will be moving away from the use of loans to fund Indigenous participation in the negotiation of modern treaties. Starting in 2018–19, Indigenous participation in modern treaty negotiations will be funded through non-repayable contributions.

The Government will engage with affected Indigenous groups on how best to address past and present negotiation loans, including forgiveness of loans.

Through Budget 2018, the Government also proposes to invest $51.4 million over the next two years to continue its support for federal and Indigenous participation in the Recognition of Indigenous Rights and Self-Determination discussion tables.

Helping Indigenous Nations Reconstitute

The Government has committed to a forward-looking and transformative agenda to renew relationships with Indigenous Peoples. Indigenous groups are seeking to rebuild their nations in a manner that responds to their priorities and the unique needs of their communities—a message they have shared with the Working Group of Ministers on the Review of Laws and Policies related to Indigenous Peoples. This was also a key recommendation of the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, and is an objective outlined in the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. As stated by the Prime Minister at the United Nations General Assembly, the Government supports this vital work.

Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to provide $101.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to support capacity development for Indigenous Peoples. Funding would be made available to Indigenous groups to support activities that would facilitate their own path to reconstituting their nations.

Permanent Bilateral Mechanisms

In December 2016, the Prime Minister announced that the Government would establish Permanent Bilateral Mechanisms with First Nations, Inuit and the Métis Nation to identify each community’s distinct priorities and help the Government and Indigenous Peoples work together to develop solutions. While Budget 2017 provided interim funding to support these Permanent Bilateral Mechanisms, Budget 2018 proposes to invest $74.9 million over five years, with $15.5 million per year ongoing, to provide ongoing support to these policy co-development forums.

New Fiscal Relationship: Strengthening First Nations Institutions and Community Capacity

The Government recognizes that in order to advance reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples and facilitate greater self-determination—including self-government—a new fiscal relationship is needed.

The Government and the Assembly of First Nations have worked together to articulate a vision for a new fiscal relationship for First Nations communities. To better support First Nations communities, to support strong Indigenous institutions and to advance the new fiscal relationship with First Nations, Budget 2018 proposes to invest $188.6 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, in the following ways:

$127.4 million over two years to directly support First Nations communities in building internal fiscal and administrative capacity. This includes $87.7 million over two years to ensure that communities under default management are able to move forward on projects that form part of their management action plans, and to support pilot projects in order to strengthen governance and community planning capacity in First Nations.

$50 million over five years, and $11 million per year ongoing, to strengthen the First Nations Financial Management Board, the First Nations Finance Authority and the First Nations Tax Commission.

$2.5 million over three years to support the First Nations Information Governance Centre’s design of a national data governance strategy and coordination of efforts to establish regional data governance centres.

$8.7 million over two years to continue and broaden work with First Nations leadership, technical experts, researchers and community representatives on the new fiscal relationship.

The Government, with First Nations partners, will also undertake a comprehensive and collaborative review of current federal government programs and funding that support First Nations governance. The purpose of the review will be to ensure that these programs provide communities with sufficient resources to hire and retain the appropriate financial and administrative staff to support good governance, plan for the future and advance their vision of self-determination.

New Fiscal Relationship: Collaborating With Self-Governing Indigenous Governments

Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to provide $189.2 million in 2018–19 to begin the implementation of new fiscal policy reforms that have been co-developed with self-governing Indigenous Peoples in Canada. This funding will support key priorities, including the closing of socio-economic gaps, infrastructure, data collection and governance.

Since Budget 1997, the Government of Canada has facilitated the implementation of sales tax and personal income tax systems for interested Indigenous governments. Under these negotiated arrangements, more than 50 such tax laws have been put into effect. Recognizing the important role that tax revenues play in supporting self-sufficiency and self determination for Indigenous governments, the Government of Canada is committed to continuing to negotiate direct taxation arrangements with Indigenous governments.

Following engagements in 2017 with Indigenous self-governments and Indigenous groups in the process of negotiating self-government to seek their views on tax matters, the Government of Canada is considering the perspectives heard, and assessing the proposals advanced, to ensure that negotiation mandates and tax arrangements with Indigenous governments are consistent with the principles underlying reconciliation and a renewed nation-to-nation fiscal relationship.

The Government of Canada also supports and encourages direct taxation arrangements between interested provinces or territories and Indigenous governments, and will continue to facilitate such arrangements.

Strengthening Indigenous Data and Research Capability

Strong governance and good decision-making rely on timely access to high-quality, relevant data. The importance of Indigenous-led statistical capacity to serve this need is underscored by the First Nations principles of Ownership, Control, Access and Possession (OCAP®). To continue to support the development and management of Indigenous data, and to further develop data governance and information management capacity among Indigenous governments, communities and organizations, Budget 2018 proposes to provide $3.8 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $0.4 million per year ongoing, to Statistics Canada to create the Indigenous Statistical Capacity Development Initiative.

This initiative will enable the Government to undertake engagement and outreach with Indigenous Peoples and organizations to better understand their statistical, data governance and information management needs, and to provide technical support services such as statistical training, courses and tools grounded in the needs of First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples. It will help Indigenous leadership, communities and governments build their own data and research capacities, and provide greater support to Indigenous institutions and organizations.

In addition, Budget 2018 proposes to provide the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council with $3.8 million in 2018–19 to develop a strategic plan that identifies new ways of doing research with Indigenous communities, including strategies to grow the capacity of Indigenous communities to conduct research and partner with the broader research community.

All long-term drinking water advisories on reserve are lifted, and all Indigenous communities have access to clean drinking water.

Indigenous children and families are safe and together, at home in their communities.

Housing for First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation communities is safe, adequate and affordable.

Indigenous Peoples receive the skills training they need to participate in the economy and contribute to the success of their communities.

The Government and Indigenous Peoples work together to accelerate the pace and number of self-determination and self-government agreements.

Indigenous Peoples and communities are rebuilding and reconstituting their nations in a manner that respects their unique priorities and needs. Public services are delivered to Indigenous Peoples by strong Indigenous institutions.

Indigenous Peoples have access to quality health care in their own communities.

1 A household is in core housing need if its housing is in need of major repairs, is overcrowded or if shelter costs exceed 30 per cent of the household's pre-tax income.



<<< source: chap-04-en.html >>>

No matter what challenges they faced, Canadians have always looked to the future—working hard to build a more prosperous and more just world for themselves, their children and their grandchildren.

That starts with a clean environment here at home. Canadians understand that our quality of life today—and our economic success tomorrow—rests on the commitments we make to protect Canada’s nature, parks and wild spaces and preserve a clean environment so that future generations of Canadians can continue to hike in our forests, swim in our lakes, watch for birds and whales, and spend time with family and friends in the natural places that mean so much to all of us.

Beyond our borders, Canadians are proud of our history of helping vulnerable people around the world. We lend a hand to those in need because we know that a safer, more prosperous world means a safer and more prosperous Canada. We understand that we are at our best and most effective when we focus our efforts. That’s the approach the Government is taking to international assistance. By focusing our assistance on the full empowerment of women and girls, we are helping to change the world for the better.

Canadians are also connected through shared values. Helping to keep each other healthy, taking care of each other when we are sick, looking out for the people in our communities who need the most help, honouring our veterans and celebrating our cultural diversity—those are the shared values Canadians uphold each and every day.

And Canadians also understand that every person deserves to feel safe and protected in a rapidly changing world, secure in the knowledge that their rights will be protected and their dignity respected. All Canadians should feel confident that they will be treated fairly under the law, and the Government will work hard to make that so.

Key Chapter 4 initiatives that advance objectives of Canada’s new Gender Results Framework:

Providing new, innovative tools to support Canada’s Feminist International Assistance Policy.

Improving the quality of life of people with dementia and ensuring that caregivers have the support they need.

Taking action to prevent and address gender-based violence, harassment and discrimination.

Enhancing diversity of the judiciary so it better represents Canadian society.

Moving towards an inclusive sport system by setting a target to achieve gender equality in sport by 2035.

Part 1: Canada’s Natural Legacy

A Clean Environment for Future Generations

As Canadians, our quality of life and our present and future prosperity are deeply connected to the environment in which we live—and more than that, the extraordinary beauty of Canada’s nature, parks, and wild spaces are central to our identity as Canadians. Whether it’s building a campfire with our kids, hiking with friends and family, or swimming in cool, clean waters, spending time in nature—and protecting it for future generations—is important to us all.

At the same time, Canadians understand that a clean environment and a strong economy go hand in hand. That is why the Government has made significant investments to protect our air, water and natural areas for our children and grandchildren, while also investing to create a world-leading clean economy.

Responding to the critical and urgent need to take action on climate change, Canada’s First Ministers, in consultation with Indigenous Peoples, adopted the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change in December 2016. To support the implementation of this historic national plan, the Government has allocated $5.7 billion over 12 years, including $2 billion for the Low Carbon Economy Fund, to combat climate change. In November 2016, the Government also launched a $1.5 billion national Oceans Protection Plan to improve marine safety and responsible shipping, protect Canada’s marine environment and offer new possibilities for Indigenous and coastal communities.

In Budget 2018, the Government is making further investments to help grow a healthy and sustainable clean economy—one that creates growth and middle class jobs, and preserves Canada’s natural heritage for generations to come.

Protecting Canada’s Nature, Parks and Wild Spaces

Whether the place we call home is a city in Southern Ontario or a small community in Canada’s Far North, the beauty that is part of Canada’s natural landscape is a gift to us all. To ensure that our children and grandchildren can continue to hike in our majestic forests and swim in our beautiful lakes, rivers and streams, Canada has committed to conserving at least 17 per cent of its land and inland waters by 2020, through networks of protected areas and other effective area-based conservation measures. Both protected and conserved areas will ensure healthier habitats for species at risk and improve biodiversity.

As almost 90 per cent of Canada’s land and inland waters are provincial and territorial Crown or Indigenous lands, achieving this goal requires open collaboration with other orders of government. To support Canada’s biodiversity and protect species at risk, the Government of Canada proposes to make historic investments totalling $1.3 billion over five years, one of the most significant investments in nature conservation in Canadian history—a true legacy for our children and grandchildren.

This investment will contribute $500 million from the federal government to create a new $1 billion Nature Fund in partnership with corporate, not-for-profit, provincial, territorial and other partners. In collaboration with partners, the Nature Fund will make it possible to secure private land, support provincial and territorial species protection efforts, and help build Indigenous capacity to conserve land and species, for our benefit and the benefit of future generations.

The remaining funding will:

Increase the federal capacity to protect species at risk and put in place new recovery initiatives for priority species, areas and threats to our environment.

Expand national wildlife areas and migratory bird sanctuaries.

Increase the federal capacity to manage protected areas, including national parks.

Continue implementation of the Species at Risk Act by supporting assessment, listing, recovery planning and action planning activities.

Establish a coordinated network of conservation areas working with provincial, territorial and Indigenous partners.

Protecting Marine Life

Whales are vital to healthy marine ecosystems, and an important part of eco-tourism in Canada’s Pacific and Atlantic coastal regions, and in the St. Lawrence Estuary.

A complex mix of threats—such as the availability of prey, increased noise levels from passing ships and pollution in the water—are endangering many whale populations, notably the southern resident killer whale, the North Atlantic right whale and the St. Lawrence Estuary beluga.

To better protect, preserve and recover endangered whale species in Canada, the Government proposes to make available $167.4 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Transport Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada. This includes funding for research to help us better understand the factors affecting the health of these whales, as well as actions that we can take now to help address threats arising from human activities.

Establishing Better Rules to Protect the Environment and Grow the Economy

The Government is delivering on its promise to protect the environment, restore public trust in federal environmental assessment and regulatory processes and provide predictability for businesses. Legislation was recently tabled in Parliament to establish better rules for the review of major projects that will protect our environment, fish and waterways, rebuild public trust, and help create new jobs and economic opportunities. The proposed changes include:

Maintaining one project, one review.

Revising the project list.

Undertaking more comprehensive impact assessments.

Making timely decisions.

Ensuring transparent, science-based decisions.

Protecting water, fish and navigation.

The Government has announced that it will invest about $1 billion over five years to support the proposed new impact assessment system and Canadian Energy Regulator; increase scientific capacity in federal departments and agencies; implement the changes required to protect water, fish and navigation; and increase Indigenous and public participation.

Pricing Carbon Pollution and Supporting Clean Growth

Central to Canada’s plan to fight climate change and grow the economy is the understanding that pollution has a real, tangible cost. It puts stress on the health of our communities, our economy and on Canadians themselves. That is why the Government of Canada is committed to putting a price on carbon pollution.

To ensure that a price on carbon pollution is in place across Canada, the Government is developing a federal carbon pollution pricing system that would apply in provinces and territories upon request, and in provinces and territories that do not have a pricing system in place that meets the federal standard by the end of 2018. The direct revenue from the carbon price on pollution under the federal system will be returned to the province or territory of origin.

Provinces and territories requesting that the federal system apply, in whole or in part, in their jurisdiction should confirm this by March 30, 2018. Provinces and territories establishing or maintaining their own system need to outline how they are implementing pricing on carbon pollution by September 1, 2018. The Government will review each system and implement the federal system in whole or in part on January 1, 2019 in any province or territory that does not have a carbon pollution pricing system that meets the minimum standard.

The Government recently released draft legislative proposals on the federal carbon pollution pricing system, as well as a regulatory framework outlining the approach to carbon pollution pricing for large industrial facilities, and intends to introduce legislation to establish that system.

To support the development and implementation of the federal carbon pollution pricing system, the Government will provide $109 million over five years, starting in 2017–18, to the Canada Revenue Agency and Environment and Climate Change Canada to implement, administer and enforce the federal carbon pollution pricing system.

In addition, to ensure that the actions established in the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change are transparent and informed by science and evidence, the Government proposes to make available $20 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, through Environment and Climate Change Canada to fulfill the Framework’s commitment to engage external experts to assess the effectiveness of its measures and identify best practices.

Government leadership is critical for Canada to achieve its goals for environmental and sustainable development. Introduced in 2017 under the oversight of the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, the Greening Government Strategy sets an ambitious target to reduce direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions from Government of Canada operations by 40 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030, and by 80 per cent below 2005 levels by 2050—consistent with world-leading jurisdictions. The Strategy also outlines a broader scope for the Government’s greening efforts, including actions on water and waste.

The Department of National Defence owns and operates more than 20,000 buildings, representing about 60 per cent of the Government of Canada’s reported greenhouse gas emissions. Canadian Forces Base Halifax alone represents 10 per cent of the Government’s reported emissions.

To reduce emissions at CFB Halifax, a planned project to refurbish the antiquated heating plant on base will be expanded to include the rehabilitation of attached buildings and distribution systems. In total, this project is expected to reduce annual emissions at the base by up to 7 per cent.

The Government, through the Low Carbon Economy Leadership Fund, is investing $1.4 billion in projects that will generate clean growth and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, while creating jobs for Canadians for years to come.

The Low Carbon Economy Leadership Fund provides funding to make buildings more energy efficient, help industries innovate to reduce emissions, and help the forestry and agriculture sectors increase stored carbon in forests and soils. All provinces that have signed the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change can apply for support through the Fund. The first round of funding agreements was announced in December 2017, with six provinces receiving funding for project proposals.

British Columbia: $162 million to support projects including the reforestation of public forests, which absorb carbon from the atmosphere and store it.

Alberta: Almost $150 million to help Albertans, including farmers and ranchers, use less energy and save money. Alberta will work with Indigenous communities to install renewable energy solutions, and will also invest in restoring forests affected by wildfires.

Ontario: $420 million to support projects such as renovating buildings, retrofitting houses and helping farmers reduce emissions from their operations.

Quebec: Over $260 million to help expand actions under the province’s 2013–2020 Climate Change Action Plan. These new investments will allow more farmers and foresters to adopt best practices, more businesses to retrofit their buildings and more industries to find innovative ways to reduce emissions.

New Brunswick: $51 million, in partnership with NB Power, to help New Brunswickers improve the energy efficiency of their homes and businesses.

Nova Scotia: $56 million to expand an existing home retrofit partnership with Efficiency Nova Scotia. Today, only those homes heated with electricity are eligible for retrofit funding. The new funding will open up the retrofit program so that any Nova Scotian home could be eligible, allowing Nova Scotians to lower their heating bills and help reduce emissions.

Announcements for the remaining jurisdictions that have signed onto the Pan-Canadian Framework will be forthcoming as project proposals are approved.

Further details regarding the competitively based Low Carbon Economy Challenge will be announced in the near future. The objective of the fund will be to maximize greenhouse gas reductions in 2030, and it will be open to all provinces and territories, municipalities, Indigenous governments and organizations, businesses, and not-for-profit organizations.

Adapting Canada’s Weather and Water Services to Climate Change

Climate change is already having an impact on Canadians. Extreme weather events, such as flooding and wildfires, can have a devastating impact on our people, our communities and our economy.

The Government maintains Canada-wide networks to collect data and monitor changes in weather, climate, water, ice and air. These networks enable the weather, water and environmental predictions that help keep people safe. The Government is proposing through Budget 2018 the following activities and investments to improve weather and water services, through Environment and Climate Change Canada:

Complete the modernization of Canada’s weather forecast and severe weather warning systems, and maintain direct support to the emergency management organizations that prepare for and respond to severe weather ($40.6 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $0.2 million in remaining amortization).

Revitalize water stations, improve services for long-range water forecasts, test and implement new technologies and expand technical and engineering capacity ($69.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $7.3 million in remaining amortization).

Support the operation of water stations that are cost-shared with provinces and territories ($9.8 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with remaining amortization of $3.1 million).

Extending Tax Support for Clean Energy

The Government of Canada works with businesses to encourage investment in clean energy generation, and to promote the use of energy efficient equipment. Tax support, such as allowing accelerated deductions of the cost of eligible capital assets, can help us achieve this shared goal. The existing accelerated deduction of these assets is scheduled to expire in 2020. Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to extend the preference to property acquired before 2025, which represents an investment of $123 million over the 2017–18 to 2022–23 period.

This renewed support will increase the after-tax income of about 900 businesses. This represents on average an additional $27,000 annually over the next five years that these companies will be able to use to invest in and grow their operations while reducing their carbon footprint. Increased adoption of clean technology will help Canada’s efforts to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases and air pollutants.

More protected and conserved areas for Canadians—and future generations of Canadians—to enjoy.

A modern ecosystem-based approach for multi-species recovery that improves species at risk conservation.

Pricing carbon pollution will contribute to achieving Canada’s international greenhouse gas reduction targets at the lowest cost, while providing an incentive for clean growth and innovation.

More investment in clean energy and a clean economy

Part 2: Canada and the World

Advancing Gender Equality Around the World

Canada recognizes the importance of investing in ways that can help those in need around the world. In June 2017, the Government released its Feminist International Assistance Policy, focusing on six interlinked areas: gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, human dignity, peace and security, inclusive governance, environment and climate action, and growth that works for everyone.

[Figure 4.1 - Text version]

To strengthen the impact of Canada’s new Feminist International Assistance Policy, and advance our international leadership in key areas, the Government proposes to provide an additional $2 billion over five years, starting in 2018–19, to the International Assistance Envelope. These new resources will be dedicated to support humanitarian assistance and Canada’s core development priorities, in particular supporting women and girls, and will reinforce Canada’s commitment to reduce poverty and to do its part to support a more inclusive, peaceful and prosperous world. Further details on the allocation of this funding will be announced in the coming year.

Canada’s new Feminist International Assistance Policy represents a turning point for the Government’s approach to international assistance. Through it, Canada has made clear its commitment to contribute to eradicating poverty and building a more peaceful, inclusive and prosperous world. In support of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Feminist International Assistance Policy puts women and girls at the centre of its plan as agents of positive change for their families, communities and countries. Gender equality will be a focus of all of Canada’s international assistance investments to address economic, political and social inequalities that prevent individuals from reaching their full potential.

$180 million over three years for the Global Partnership for Education to support girls’ education and help strengthen education systems in developing countries.

$15 million over four years to Marie Stopes Tanzania to provide girls and women with improved access to family planning information and services.

The launch of the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, which includes: $6 million to designated United Nations missions to improve their ability to support and benefit women’s increased participation in peace operations. $15 million to launch a global fund to support the deployment of women peacekeepers.

To advance gender equality around the world, the Government will:

Champion the voice and participation of women and girls, including supporting local women’s organizations to defend women’s rights and address barriers.

Ensure that Canada’s assistance integrates and targets gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls.

Support the full spectrum of health programming, including comprehensive sexual and reproductive health and rights.

Address climate change and mitigate its impacts by investing in renewable energy and environmental practices that support healthy, resilient and adaptive communities.

Focus on growth that works for everyone by helping to increase women’s economic participation.

Ensure institutions, policies and processes are more accessible and responsive to the poorest and most vulnerable, including women and girls.

Pursue a gender-responsive approach during humanitarian crises to better respond to the unique needs of women and girls.

Support inclusive approaches to building sustainable peace and security by helping women to participate in resolving conflicts and political crises, and by ensuring that responses to transnational threats account for and meet the needs of women and girls.

The Government will track and report on progress to Canadians based on a clear framework with targets for action and indicators for results, aligned with the 17 goals of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The Feminist International Assistance Policy establishes baselines and sets clear targets to:

Shift its programming with no gender equality focus from 30 per cent to 5 per cent to ensure that at least 95 per cent of Canada’s bilateral international development assistance will either target or integrate gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls by 2021–22.

Strengthen its focus on sexual and reproductive health and rights by doubling its commitment to $650 million over the next three years.

Target the poorest and most vulnerable by boosting bilateral assistance to Sub-Saharan African countries from 46 to 50 per cent by 2021–22.

[Figure 4.2 - Text version]

Additional Support for the Feminist International Assistance Policy

Taking more innovative approaches to international assistance will also be an essential part of Canada’s Feminist International Assistance Policy. In addition to the new international assistance resources announced in Budget 2018, the Government proposes to provide $1.5 billion over five years, starting in 2018–19, on a cash basis ($553 million on an accrual basis), and $492.7 million per year thereafter, from existing unallocated International Assistance Envelope resources, to support innovation in Canada’s international assistance through the following two new programs:

The International Assistance Innovation Program . This program will give the Government greater flexibility for financing arrangements and partnerships and ensure Canada remains at the leading edge of development financing. The Government proposes to commit $873.4 million over five years on a cash basis, and $290.5 million per year thereafter, for this new program.

The Sovereign Loans Program . This pilot program will diversify the tools Canada has to engage partner countries and international development organizations. It will also better align Canada’s international assistance toolkit with that of other donors. The Government proposes to commit up to $626.6 million over five years on a cash basis, and up to $202.2 million per year thereafter, for the Sovereign Loans Program.

These measures will complement existing core international assistance activities, and will increase the impact of Canada’s international assistance by allowing the Government to explore new and innovative ways to engage internationally, including exploring the use of guarantees, equity and conditionally repayable contributions. These new measures are expected to double Canada’s international assistance provided through innovative tools over the next five years. The Government proposes to introduce any necessary legislative measures to enable Global Affairs Canada to carry out these new programs.

Protecting Vulnerable Women and Girls

Half of the world’s 22.5 million refugee population is made up of women and girls, making this population a significant segment of those fleeing war, violence or persecution in their home countries. Refugee women and girls face increased risks due to their gender, and are at risk of, or have suffered from, sexual violence and exploitation, physical abuse and marginalization.

Since 2015, Canada has demonstrated global leadership in providing protection to the world’s most vulnerable refugees. As of January 2017, more than 40,000 Syrian refugees were welcomed in Canada, where they have built new lives for themselves and their families. In addition, Budget 2017 announced funding of $27.7 million over three years, beginning in 2017–18, to resettle Yazidi women and girls, who were being targeted for abduction and enslavement by Daesh fighters in northern Iraq and Syria.

Building on these efforts, the Government commits to increase the number of vulnerable refugee women and girls to be resettled in Canada as government-assisted refugees. Specifically, Budget 2018 proposes funding of $20.3 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, to welcome an extra 1,000 refugee women and girls from various conflict zones around the world. Providing additional support to this particularly vulnerable group will allow Canada to continue to show global leadership in helping the world’s most at-risk people.

In the world’s poorest and most vulnerable communities, women and girls are particularly at risk when it comes to climate change. Women and girls are often the primary producers of food and providers of water, heating and cooking fuel for households. When the resources become more unpredictable and scarce due to, for example, extreme weather, women and girls have to spend more time and efforts attending to basic needs such as growing food and collecting water and fuel.

Canada has been an international champion in bringing a gender lens to climate change. Canada was a leader in securing the first ever Gender Action Plan under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, adopted by countries at COP23 last year. The plan aims to bring more women to the negotiation table, promoting more responsive climate policies at both the grassroots and global levels.

Canada is leading by example in this regard, through its own Chief Negotiator and her team, with Canada’s climate negotiators also providing training to women negotiators from Caribbean countries to strengthen their voices at international climate talks. The Government is also integrating a gender lens in the delivery of its historic $2.65 billion commitment to support climate action in developing countries, including through its contribution to the National Adaptation Plans Global Network.

In addition, as part of Canada’s focus on climate action and gender in the Group of Seven (G7), the Minister of Environment and Climate Change, Catherine McKenna, will host a summit of women climate leaders in the spring of 2018 to help accelerate global momentum for climate action.

Enhancing Transparency in Canada’s International Assistance Programming

Over the last number of years, the international assistance community has called on Canada to further improve communications around its international assistance budget. Previously, public commitments did not always include comprehensive details, including the total size and allocations of federal international assistance. To address this, the Feminist International Assistance Policy has committed to clarify Canada’s federal contributions to international assistance.

[Chart 4.1 - Text version]

New International Assistance Resources and Allocations

The Government is also bringing forward a reform to the International Assistance Envelope funding structure regarding humanitarian assistance and core development assistance. For many years, the Minister of International Development has had to manage a single pool of funding to address core development priorities, as well as humanitarian assistance priorities. With the increasing scope of conflicts around the world, demand for humanitarian assistance has increased, and under the current funding structure, this has led to reductions in resources for other programs. With this reform, the Government will create a dedicated pool of funding for humanitarian assistance, and a separate dedicated pool of funding for core development assistance. These changes will help to achieve the goals of the Feminist International Assistance Policy.

Canada is committed to ensuring information on its international assistance funding is open and transparent, and is pleased to chair the International Aid Transparency Initiative. The Government will explore further enhancing its international assistance reporting, including consideration of legislative updates as appropriate. Over the coming year, the Government will determine how it can better communicate international assistance efforts to Canadians, non-governmental organizations and the international community from a historical perspective as well as the size and distribution of assistance planned for the coming year.

Implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

Canadians can be proud of our history of helping others around the world, including providing emergency and development assistance to the poorest and most vulnerable. We understand that a safer, more prosperous world means a safer and more prosperous Canada.

In 2015, Canada, along with all other United Nations member states, committed to implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which set 17 goals (known as Sustainable Development Goals or SDGs) to eliminate poverty, protect the planet and ensure prosperity by the year 2030.

[Figure 4.3 - Text version]

These goals are universal, and apply to all countries. This means working to end all forms of poverty, fight inequalities, tackle climate change and support sustainable economic growth here at home, and helping other countries through our diplomacy, trade, peace and security, and international assistance efforts.

To reach these goals, in 2016, the Government of Canada began a comprehensive review of its international assistance support to improve the effectiveness of Canada’s international assistance. The result was a new Feminist International Assistance Policy, unveiled in June 2017, and centred around SDG 5: Gender Equality.

The Government is working hard to make progress on the goals for sustainable development here in Canada, and around the world, including work on:

Strengthening and growing the middle class: The middle class tax cut, the Canada Child Benefit, improvements to Employment Insurance, investments in skills that will help Canadians succeed in the new economy, and efforts to ensure the affordability of post-secondary education all contribute to SDG 1 (No Poverty) and SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth).

Gender equality: The Government’s leadership both at home and on the world stage on gender equality, through measures aimed at promoting pay equity, encouraging greater workforce participation among women, helping to combat gender-based violence and implementing the Feminist International Assistance Policy, is helping to make headway on SDG 5 (Gender Equality).

Innovation, infrastructure and clean economic growth: Support for innovation in key growth industries such as clean technology, digital and agri-food, support for innovation networks and clusters, and the Investing in Canada plan including investments in green infrastructure, support for safe and clean drinking water in First Nations communities and the creation of the Canada Infrastructure Bank, help to achieve SDG 6 (Clean Water and Sanitation), SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy), SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth), SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure) and SDG 11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities).

Inclusiveness and fairness for all Canadians: Better supports for veterans, help for seniors and future retirees, programs to help those who are underrepresented in the workforce find good jobs, and renewed partnerships with Indigenous Peoples all contribute to SDG 1 (No Poverty), SDG 3 (Good Health and Well-being) and SDG 10 (Reduced Inequalities).

Combatting climate change: Support for the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, investments in clean economic growth, and investments in international climate finance all contribute to SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy), SDG 11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities), SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and Production) and SDG 13 (Climate Action).

Budget 2018 continues Canada’s efforts to reach the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development:

Supporting equal parenting: Introducing a new Employment Insurance (EI) Parental Sharing Benefit that will increase the number of weeks of EI parental benefits by up to eight weeks for parents who agree to share parental leave will advance SDG 5 (Gender Equality) by encouraging greater equality when it comes to child care and the distribution of unpaid work within the family, while allowing flexibility for earlier returns to work.

More help for the middle class and people working hard to join it: Introducing the Canada Workers Benefit—a strengthened and more accessible benefit based on the Working Income Tax Benefit—and strengthening the Canada Child Benefit contribute to SDG 1 (No Poverty).

Building a healthy environment for future generations: Implementing the Pan-Canadian Approach to Pricing Carbon Pollution, including the federal carbon pollution pricing system, contributes to Canada’s plan to address climate change and grow the economy, and supports SDG 13 (Climate Action) and SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth). Extending tax support for clean energy to 2025 from 2020 will contribute to SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy).

Supporting the Feminist International Assistance Policy: New resources and tools for international assistance will help partner countries work towards achieving all of the SDGs, with achieving SDG 5 (Gender Equality) at the core of our support.

Enhancing access to justice and reinforcing public safety: To achieve SDG 16 (Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions), various investments will be made in support of the judiciary, the court system and legal support services to help empower Canadians to better understand and exercise their legal rights. For example, the Government is continuing to support Canadian families that are experiencing separation and divorce by expanding the Unified Family Courts system. The Government is also reinforcing Canada’s public safety institutions, supporting frontline operations.

To support reporting and ensure continued progress and coordination of our efforts on the Sustainable Development Goals both domestically and internationally, the Government proposes to provide $49.4 million over 13 years, starting in 2018–19, to establish a Sustainable Development Goals Unit, and fund monitoring and reporting activities by Statistics Canada. This will enable better coordination among all levels of government, civil society organizations and the private sector on Canada’s efforts on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It will also support the monitoring and reporting of Canada’s domestic and international efforts to ensure that all of the Sustainable Development Goals are achieved by 2030 and that no one is left behind. The Government is also proposing to provide, from existing departmental resources, up to $59.8 million over 13 years, starting in 2018–19, for programming to support the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.

The G7 Presidency offers Canada an opportunity to bring its people-first approach to growing a strong middle class to the international stage. By engaging other G7 countries on pressing global challenges, we can demonstrate how taking care of each other can lead to stronger growth and better outcomes.

In this coming year, Canada will use its G7 Presidency to advance the following five key priorities:

Investing in growth that works for everyone —building a system that is fair and open, so that people have the needed support, resources and confidence to succeed.

Preparing for jobs of the future —helping everyone get the skills they need to find and keep good jobs—not just today, but in tomorrow’s economy as well.

Advancing gender equality and women’s empowerment —integrating gender equality and women’s empowerment considerations in all of Canada’s G7 activities, to ensure our priorities are truly inclusive.

Working together on climate change, oceans and clean energy —investing in clean energy and technologies to protect vulnerable ecosystems and manage limited resources properly.

Building a more peaceful and secure world —reaching out to our partners to build solutions that can deliver lasting peace while accounting for the changing nature of conflicts.

In addition, the Gender Equality Advisory Council for Canada’s G7 Presidency—co-chaired by Melinda Gates and Ambassador Isabelle Hudon—will ensure that gender equality and women’s empowerment are integrated across all themes, activities and initiatives of Canada’s G7 Presidency.

As G7 partners, we share a responsibility to ensure that all citizens benefit from our global economy, and that we leave a healthier, more peaceful, and more secure world for our children and grandchildren.

Part 3: Upholding Shared Values

Supporting the Health and Wellness of Canadians

A strong publicly funded health care system is not just a point of pride for Canadians, it is also an essential foundation for a strong, fair and prosperous country in the years to come.

In 2018–19, the Government will provide nearly $38.6 billion to the provinces and territories under the Canada Health Transfer, an increase of $1.4 billion over the previous year, to help provincial and territorial health care systems adapt, innovate and address new challenges. In addition to the Canada Health Transfer, the Government is committed to working with the provinces and territories to tackle issues that affect the health of Canadians, to improve the responsiveness of our health care system, and to close gaps where the quality or availability of health care is not at the high standard Canadians expect and deserve. Recently, federal, provincial and territorial governments worked together to find ways to strengthen the health care system in Canada, reaching new funding agreements that will provide $11 billion over 10 years to provincial and territorial governments in support of home care and mental health.

Addressing the Opioid Crisis

Canada is in the midst of an opioid crisis. In 2016 alone, more than 2,800 Canadian lives were lost to apparent opioid overdoses. British Columbia has been at the forefront of this crisis, declaring a public health emergency nearly two years ago. However, the impact of the crisis is now being felt in many communities across the country—from inner cities to suburbs as well as in northern and rural communities and in Indigenous communities. The Government is committed to taking action.

While problematic substance use has long been a reality in Canada, circumstances have fundamentally changed. Fentanyl is a highly toxic synthetic opioid which can have medical uses, but has also been introduced into Canada’s illegal drug supply. Fentanyl is being added to a variety of street drugs, without the knowledge of the people buying them.

Most illicit fentanyl in Canada is illegally diverted from China. Canada is working closely with China, the United States and other international partners to disrupt the export of illegally produced fentanyl and to better detect it if it arrives at the border.

Increased opioid use is not limited to illegal drugs. Canada is the second-highest per capita consumer of opioids in the world. Reducing prescription opioid use presents challenges since limiting access to prescription opioids may encourage people to seek more dangerous alternative sources.

People turn to illegal drugs for many reasons. Some people habitually use illegal drugs as an escape from pain and trauma. Some use illegal drugs on a recreational basis. Others began using prescription opioids, developed a dependence, and then turned to illegal drugs when prescription opioids were insufficient or unavailable. As a result, a broad range of people are being affected by Canada’s opioid crisis.

[Figure 4.4 - Text version]

The former Minister of Health has described the opioid crisis as “the most serious public health issue we’re facing right now”—one that affects people of all ages and backgrounds, devastating communities and tearing apart families.

In an effort to save lives, governments, non-governmental organizations, health and public safety professionals, and individual Canadians across the country have been responding to the crisis. Since early 2016, the Government has been working with provinces and territories as well as a range of partners to address this crisis. The Government recognizes that the opioid crisis has had a significant effect on many communities. The crisis has claimed the lives of thousands of Canadians from all walks of life and has had a devastating impact on many Canadian families. The Government is committed to protecting the health and safety of all Canadians through a compassionate and collaborative approach to addressing problematic substance abuse. To help address this crisis, the Government has made new investments, introduced new legislation, and fast-tracked regulatory action in an attempt to prevent further deaths. These investments and actions are helping to support individuals, families and communities that are directly affected by the crisis.

$100 million over five years to support the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy to support national measures and actions to respond to the opioid crisis

Over $20 million in emergency financial assistance for British Columbia, Alberta and Manitoba to help these provinces respond to the overwhelming effects of the opioid crisis and address the critical needs of their citizens

To help protect Canadians from dangerous opioids, changes were made to the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act and other Acts, to allow the Minister of Health to quickly control a new and hazardous substance and to allow border officials to open small mail items, in order to detain or seize illegal substances such as fentanyl

To ensure that supervised consumption sites could be established in a timely manner so that treatment services are more readily available for Canadians, including streamlining the approval process for sites

Passed the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act , which provides some legal protection for individuals who seek emergency help during an overdose

Significantly reduced barriers for communities that wish to establish safe consumption sites. Building on successful harm reduction models such as Vancouver’s InSite clinic, these sites will save lives.

Enabled access to drugs or medications authorized in other countries to respond to urgent public health needs

Made naloxone more widely available and expedited approval of the nasal spray version

Scheduled fentanyl precursors under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act

Despite these significant efforts and those of many others, the number of opioid-related deaths continues to rise. It is projected that in 2017, more than 4,000 Canadians will have died as a result of opioid use.

Building on the federal actions to date, the Government proposes to provide $231.4 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $1.9 million in remaining amortization and $13.5 million per year ongoing, for additional measures to help address the opioid crisis. Key measures include:

Providing one-time emergency funding of $150 million for provinces and territories for multi-year projects that improve access to evidence-based treatment services.

Launching a public education campaign to address stigma that creates barriers for those seeking treatment.

Improving access to public health data and analysis to better understand the opioid crisis and inform strategies to address it.

Equipping border agents with detection and identification tools to intercept fentanyl and other substances at ports of entry.

Expanding the Substance Use and Addictions Program to develop innovative approaches to treatment and prevention.

In addition, as noted in Chapter 3, Budget 2018 also proposes targeted and specific investments in First Nations communities with high needs to address problematic substance use, including opioids.

Taken together, these investments will help to cut off the supply of dangerous drugs by preventing the illegal import of substances, will help people living with addiction and substance abuse disorders get the help they need, and will help educate more Canadians about the need to support those who seek treatment.

Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare

The Government has published proposed changes to the Patented Medicines Regulations, representing the first major update to the regulations in more than 20 years. These proposed amendments to the regulations are estimated to lower drug prices for Canadians by $12.6 billion over 10 years.

In addition, the Government is collaborating with the provinces and territories in the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA). The Alliance negotiates on behalf of Canada’s public drug plans to lower prices on brand name drugs and works to reduce the cost of generic medications as well. The pCPA's efforts to date have led to over $1.2 billion a year in savings for Canadians.

Canadians are proud of our publicly funded, universal medicare system which is based on need and not on ability to pay. Yet, we know that at least one in ten Canadians cannot afford the prescription drugs they need. Every year, almost one million Canadians give up food and heat to afford medicines. And those who can pay for their drugs face some of the highest costs among the world’s most advanced countries. The unaffordability of many medications leads to Canadians being less healthy, with significantly higher health care costs for us all.

The Government has demonstrated its commitment to improving access to necessary prescription medications, by taking concrete steps to lower drug prices, streamline regulatory processes for drug approval, support better prescribing practices and explore a national drug formulary. These steps will significantly improve the accessibility and affordability of prescription medications, but there is an opportunity to do even more.

As part of Budget 2018, the Government is announcing the creation of an Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare. We are appointing Dr. Eric Hoskins, who recently served as the Minister of Health of Ontario, to chair this initiative. He and board members will begin a national dialogue that will include working closely with experts from all relevant fields as well as with national, provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders. The Advisory Council will report to the federal Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance and will conduct an economic and social assessment of domestic and international models, and will recommend options on how to move forward together on this important subject.

A Community-Based Approach to Dementia

More than 400,000 Canadian seniors live with dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease. Women are disproportionately affected, making up two-thirds of this population. Many women also take on the caregiving responsibilities for family members living with dementia. Budget 2018 proposes to provide $20 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $4 million per year ongoing, to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support community-based projects that address the challenges of dementia. Projects could include programs that provide mental health supports and information about self-care for family caregivers, or initiatives that help Canadians locate resources in their communities quickly, including information about best practices for providing care for people living with dementia. This new funding will help to improve the quality of life of people living with dementia and ensure that caregivers—who are predominantly women—have access to the resources they need, including mental health supports.

Supporting a Healthy Seniors Pilot Project in New Brunswick

Canada’s population is aging—the most recent demographic information from Statistics Canada shows that approximately 17 per cent of the Canadian population are age 65 or older, up from about 15 per cent five years earlier.

Notably, women make up the majority of the Canadian population over the age of 65. Senior women face different challenges than senior men—women tend to live longer than men, and as such more senior women live alone than their male counterparts. In addition, the responsibility of care for aging spouses and parents predominantly falls on women.

As Canada’s population continues to age, we need to be prepared for the challenges that seniors, especially senior women, face. That is why Budget 2018 proposes to provide $75 million in 2018–19 through the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Healthy Seniors Pilot Project in New Brunswick. New Brunswick is uniquely suited to undertake this pilot project as its population is aging faster than the rest of Canada. A higher proportion of New Brunswick’s population is over the age of 65—compared to other provinces—and the province is home to a measurably higher proportion of women over the age of 65, relative to the Canadian average.

The Healthy Seniors Pilot Project will support a range of research initiatives to examine how governments can better support seniors in their home, communities and care facilities. This project will help us better understand the gendered impacts of an aging population, improve the quality of life for our senior citizens, and help us lay the groundwork for the dissemination of best practices in supporting healthy aging for all Canadians.

Expanding Eligibility Under the Thalidomide Survivors Contribution Program

The Thalidomide Survivors Contribution Program was established in 2015 to provide financial assistance for thalidomide survivors. The program includes a tax-free, lump sum payment to each survivor to help cover urgent health care needs, ongoing annual payments based on level of disability, and an Extraordinary Medical Assistance Fund to support survivors with extraordinary medical expenses such as specialized surgery not otherwise covered by provincial/territorial health care plans or home or vehicle adaptations.

There is a concern that some thalidomide survivors may have been excluded by current eligibility criteria since, given the passage of time, it is difficult for claimants to obtain documentary proof that they are survivors. To address this concern, the program will be expanded to help ensure that all eligible thalidomide survivors receive the financial support they need. Additional details will be announced later this spring. All payments to eligible individuals will continue to be tax-free and annual payments will continue to keep pace with the cost of living.

Support for Canadians Impacted by Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism spectrum disorder is a complex, lifelong neurodevelopmental disorder that can have serious health, social and financial consequences for Canadian families.

Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to provide $20 million over five years for two new initiatives to better support the needs of Canadians experiencing autism spectrum disorder and their families. This will include the creation an Autism-Intellectual-Developmental Disabilities National Resource and Exchange Network (AIDE) to develop online resources, an inventory of services, employment opportunities and local programming for families across the country, based on their specific needs. The Network would be led by the Pacific Autism Family Network and the Miriam Foundation. Funding of $9.1 million will also be provided to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support community-based projects that will support innovative program models, help reduce stigma, and support the integration of health, social and educational programs to better serve the complex needs of families.

Expanding the Medical Expense Tax Credit for Psychiatric Service Dogs

The Government recognizes that psychiatric service dogs can play an important role in helping Canadians cope with conditions like post-traumatic stress disorder. Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to expand the Medical Expense Tax Credit to recognize costs for these animals for the 2018 and future tax years.

This measure will directly benefit veterans and others in the disability community who rely on psychiatric service dogs, and complements the work of organizations that support them, such as the Royal Canadian Legion, and Paws Fur Thought, which provides service dogs to veterans and first responders with invisible disabilities.

Improving Compliance with the Canada Health Act

The Government contributes to the delivery of Canada’s publicly funded health care system through the Canada Health Transfer, which will provide nearly $38.6 billion to provinces and territories in 2018–19. Under the Canada Health Act , the Minister of Health may direct deductions from Canada Health Transfer payments if a province or territory permits extra-billing and user fees in the delivery of public health care. To encourage provinces and territories to take corrective action to align their public health care systems with the principles of the Canada Health Act , as well as to recognize those that have addressed issues of non-compliance, the Government is proposing legislative amendments to allow Canada Health Transfer deductions to be reimbursed when provinces and territories have taken the steps necessary to eliminate extra-billing and user fees in the delivery of public health care.

Taking Action to Reduce Smoking

Tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death in Canada. Combined federal/provincial/territorial tobacco control efforts over the last several years have contributed to a decline in smoking rates. Despite this progress, over 5 million Canadians continue to use tobacco products. Every day, Canadians are getting sick or dying because of tobacco use and exposure to second hand smoke. The Government is committed to helping Canadians with an addiction to tobacco, and to protecting the health of young people and non­smokers.

Renewing and Enhancing the Federal Tobacco Control Strategy

The Federal Tobacco Control Strategy is a comprehensive, integrated and sustained tobacco control program aimed at reducing tobacco-related disease and death.

Building on existing funding, the Government will renew and enhance the Strategy by proposing to provide $80.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $17.7 million per year ongoing. Public Safety Canada will renew agreements with the Akwesasne Mohawk Police Service and the Kahnawake Peacekeepers to address organized crime activities at or near community lands, including contraband tobacco, and funding will also be provided to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to support ongoing law enforcement efforts to reduce contraband tobacco. Funding will also be provided to Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada to support targeted actions, including in Indigenous communities, to encourage the prevention of tobacco use and help Canadians quit smoking. This enhanced funding builds on the $43 million spent annually for the Federal Tobacco Control Strategy and will help to replace previous cuts in spending over the last decade so that Canada can remain a leader in tobacco control.

Tobacco Taxation

Every 14 minutes, a Canadian dies from a tobacco-related illness; that's 37,000 Canadians per year. Despite our efforts, there are still millions of Canadians who use tobacco and about 115,000 Canadians start smoking every year.

Tobacco taxation is known to be one of the most effective ways to reduce smoking, and to keep tobacco products out of the hands of young people. To that end, the Government proposes to advance the inflationary adjustments for tobacco excise duty so that they occur on an annual basis rather than every five years.

The Government also proposes to increase the excise duty by an additional $1 per carton of 200 cigarettes, along with corresponding increases to the excise duty rates on other tobacco products.

Cannabis Taxation, Regulation and Public Protection: Legalizing Cannabis in 2018

Made strategic investments of $546 million over five years to implement and enforce the new federal legislative and regulatory framework.

Made significant investments of $150 million over six years to train and equip law enforcement to detect and deter drug-impaired driving.

Launched public education and awareness activities, having invested $46 million, on drug-impaired driving and health risks.

Communicated the new laws and enforcement framework to police, including online information and training materials, to ensure law enforcement is well informed to apply the new legislation, if approved.

Launched and released the results of the new Canadian Cannabis Survey to monitor patterns of use in Canada.

The Government has committed to legalize and strictly regulate and restrict access to cannabis in order to keep it out of the hands of young Canadians, and keep profits away from criminals and organized crime. To that end, in 2017 the Government introduced Bill C-45, the Cannabis Act, to establish a strict system for the cultivation, production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis in Canada, and made strategic investments to implement and enforce the new federal legislative framework.

Impaired driving is the leading criminal cause of death and injury in Canada. To strengthen our impaired driving laws to keep Canada’s roads safe, the Government has also introduced legislation to better protect the public from both drug- and alcohol-impaired drivers.

Cannabis Taxation

To keep cannabis out of the hands of youth and profits out of the hands of criminals, the Government is proposing an excise duty framework for cannabis products.

Under the framework, excise duties will be imposed on federally licensed producers at the higher of a flat rate applied on the quantity of cannabis contained in a final product, or a percentage of the sale price of the product sold by a federal licensee.

The excise duty framework will generally apply to cannabis products that contain Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the primary psychoactive compound of cannabis. Recognizing the non-addictive, potentially therapeutic role of low-THC cannabidiol oils, which are sometimes used with children facing certain medical conditions, products that contain low amounts of THC will generally not be subject to the excise duty. Pharmaceutical products derived from cannabis will also be exempt, provided that the cannabis product has a Drug Identification Number and can only be acquired through a prescription. Work will be undertaken by Health Canada to evaluate the drug review and approval process so that Canadians in need have better access to an array of medicinal options. As part of this work, the Government will also examine options for establishing a rebate program to retroactively reimburse Canadians an amount in recognition of the federal portion of the proposed excise duty that was imposed on equivalent products prior to them being given a Drug Identification Number.

In December 2017, the federal government reached an agreement with most provincial and territorial governments to keep duties on cannabis low, the higher of $1 per gram or 10 per cent of a product price, through a federally administrated coordinated framework. This tax room will be shared on a 75/25 basis, with 75 per cent of duties going to provincial and territorial governments and the remaining 25 per cent to the federal government. The federal portion of cannabis excise duty revenue will be capped at $100 million annually for the first two years after legalization. Any federal revenue in excess of $100 million will be provided to provinces and territories. As part of this arrangement, it is the federal government’s expectation that a substantial portion of the revenues from this tax room provided to provinces and territories will be transferred to municipalities and local communities, who are on the front lines of legalization.

The excise duty framework would come fully into effect when cannabis for non-medical purposes becomes accessible for retail sale.

Cannabis Public Education

The experience of other jurisdictions that have legalized cannabis has underlined the importance of ensuring that Canadians are well informed about cannabis. The Government proposes to provide $62.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, for public education initiatives. This funding will support the involvement of community-based organizations and Indigenous organizations that are educating their communities on the risks associated with cannabis use. The Government also proposes to provide $10 million over five years for the Mental Health Commission of Canada to help assess the impact of cannabis use on the mental health of Canadians, and $10 million over five years to the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction to support research on cannabis use in Canada. These two investments will help inform future policy development, building on earlier significant public education investments of $46 million that have helped inform Canadians. With these investments, Canada’s spending on public education related to cannabis will be on par with the per-capita amounts spent by the State of Washington in its own experience with the legalization and strict regulation of cannabis.

Support for Canada’s Veterans

The Government of Canada is committed to supporting Canada's veterans and their families. Canada owes an enormous debt of gratitude to the women and men who have served in uniform and it is our responsibility to make sure that they are taken care of. On December 20, 2017, the Government unveiled its Pension for Life plan, a program designed to reduce the complexity of support programs available to veterans and their families. It proposes a broader range of benefits, including financial stability, to Canada's veterans, with a particular focus on supports for veterans with the most severe disabilities.

A monthly, tax-free payment for life of up to $1,150 for ill and injured veterans.

A monthly, tax-free payment for life of up to $1,500 for veterans whose injuries greatly impact their quality of life.

Monthly income replacement at 90 per cent of a veteran’s pre-release salary.

The Government will introduce legislation for the Pension for Life plan, which will include the choice of tax-free monthly payments for life to recognize pain and suffering caused by a service-related disability up to a maximum monthly amount of $2,650 for those most severely disabled; and income replacement for veterans who are facing barriers returning to work after military service at 90 per cent of their pre-release salary.

Pension for Life means that a 25-year-old retired corporal who is 100 per cent disabled would receive more than $5,800 in monthly support. For a 50-year-old retired major who is 100 per cent disabled, monthly support would be almost $9,000.

These new elements represent an additional investment of almost $3.6 billion to support Canada's veterans. When combined with services and benefits to help veterans in a wide-range of areas—including education, employment, caregiver support and physical and mental health—already announced in previous budgets, the Government of Canada’s investments since 2016 add up to nearly $10 billion.

Jamal spent 25 years in service as a combat engineer in a field squadron. While deployed on Operation ATHENA, he was critically injured when his vehicle hit an improvised explosive device. Both his legs were amputated above the knee. After stabilizing with the Canadian Armed Forces Joint Personnel Support Unit, Jamal was medically released. His sister, Nadyia, moved in with him to act as his caregiver.

With a disability assessment of 100 per cent, Jamal will receive monthly tax-free Pain and Suffering Compensation and Additional Pain and Suffering Compensation of $2,550 (in 2017 dollars), or about $30,000 annually. This will be paid for life. He will also receive a tax free lump sum Critical Injury Benefit of about $72,000 to address the immediate impacts of his traumatic injury.

In addition, Jamal will receive an Income Replacement Benefit of 90 per cent of his salary at release, equalling about $6,400 per month, or about $77,000 annually after-tax. Once Jamal reaches the age of 65, his Income Replacement Benefit will continue at a reduced rate.

Jamal is still coming to terms with both his life after service and his new physical reality. His Veterans Affairs Canada case manager arranges for an occupational therapist, a social worker and a psychologist to work with him. Jamal has both a wheelchair and a motor scooter to give him greater independence; the cost of both is covered by Veterans Affairs Canada. He also receives grants through the Veterans Independence Program to cover house cleaning and work around his property, as well as snow removal in the winter. He has also arranged for Nadyia to receive the $1,000 per month Caregiver Recognition Benefit to recognize her contribution in support of his well-being.

Cemetery and Grave Maintenance

Veterans Affairs Canada is committed to honouring the sacrifice of our veterans by maintaining the graves and grave markers for Canadians who were buried or had grave markers erected by the Government of Canada. These sites and markers recognize the bravery and commitment of those who served our country and they must be maintained. There are about 110,000 Canadians buried overseas as a result of the two World Wars, as well as 200,000 graves in Canada for veterans who were low income or whose death was related to their military service.

In 2017, an evaluation by Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC) found that there was a backlog of 45,000 graves cared for by VAC in Canada requiring repairs. With existing levels of funding, the evaluation found that it would take more than 17 years to complete the needed repairs. To eliminate the current backlog of repairs in the next 5 years, the Government proposes to provide funding $24.4 million over five years, starting in 2018–19. The funding will be used for cleaning, restoring or replacing headstones, and fixing foundation issues.

Better Services for Veterans

Since 2016, the Government has put in place substantial improvements to the benefits and services available for veterans. For example, the Government has raised financial supports for veterans and caregivers, introduced new education and training benefits and expanded a range of services available to the families of medically released veterans.

With additional benefits and services now becoming available, more and more veterans are coming forward to get the help they need. For example, over the past two years, Veterans Affairs Canada has seen a 32 per cent increase in the number of applications for disability benefits. To keep up with the rise in demand and ensure that veterans get services and benefits when they need them, the Government proposes to provide $42.8 million over two years, starting in 2018–19, to increase service delivery capacity at Veterans Affairs Canada.

Supporting Canada’s Heritage and Cultural Diversity

Canada’s heritage and culture plays a vital part in the day-to-day lives of Canadians. To support this important sector of our economy, Budget 2018 proposes investments that will ensure that Canada’s heritage can be celebrated and shared by more Canadians in more communities across the country.

Supporting Canada’s Official Languages

Canada’s linguistic duality, which for 50 years has been enshrined in the Official Languages Act , is an integral part of Canada’s history and identity. Strong official language minority communities not only celebrate our shared history and identity, they are essential to Canada’s competitiveness in an increasingly globalized world. The Government understands the challenges that official language minority communities are facing, and has developed an Action Plan for Official Languages 2018-2023 to help address some of these challenges. In addition to serving existing communities, providing services and initiatives in both official languages is key to improving the integration and settlement of new immigrants. By promoting official bilingualism and empowering our communities to tell their stories, we strengthen Canada’s diversity, strengthen our communities and increase our influence around the world.

The Government proposes to provide $400.0 million in new funding over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $88.4 million per year ongoing, in support of the Action Plan for Official Languages 2018-2023. Key measures will be implemented by Canadian Heritage, Employment and Social Development Canada, Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada, Statistics Canada, and Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada and will include funding for:

Community organizations to ensure that they are able to continue to provide important services for individuals in their communities, to welcome newcomers, and to foster early childhood development.

Cultural, artistic and heritage activities, including community theatre, art workshops, and activities showcasing local heritage or history.

French- and English-language minority community radio stations and newspapers.

Development of an interactive application to make it easy for Canadians to learn English or French as a second language.

Improved access to services for English-speaking communities of Quebec in their official language.

The recruitment and retention of teachers who teach French and English as a second language.

Minority official language schools, $20 million for a variety of early learning and child care initiatives.

Taken together, the Action Plan will help improve services in official language minority communities and promote bilingualism across Canada.

Strengthening Multiculturalism and Addressing the Challenges Faced by Black Canadians

Diversity is Canada’s strength and a cornerstone of Canadian identity. Recent domestic and international events, like the rise of ultranationalist movements, and protests against immigration, visible minorities and religious minorities, remind us that standing up for diversity and building communities where everyone feels included are as important today as they ever were.

To provide support for events and projects that help individuals and communities come together, the Government proposes to provide $23 million over two years, starting in 2018–19, to increase funding for the Multiculturalism Program administered by Canadian Heritage. This funding would support cross-country consultations on a new national anti-racism approach, would bring together experts, community organizations, citizens and interfaith leaders to find new ways to collaborate and combat discrimination, and would dedicate increased funds to address racism and discrimination targeted against Indigenous Peoples and women and girls.

As a first step toward recognizing the significant and unique challenges faced by Black Canadians, the Government also proposes to provide $19 million over five years that will be targeted to enhance local community supports for youth at risk and to develop research in support of more culturally focused mental health programs in the Black Canadian community. In addition, with the creation of the new Centre for Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Statistics, announced in Chapter 1, the Government is committed to increase the disaggregation of various data sets by race. This will help governments and service providers better understand the intersectional dimensions of major issues, with a particular focus on the experience of Black Canadians.

Investing in Canadian Content

The Canada Media Fund is a non-profit organization that fosters, promotes, develops and finances the production of Canadian content for all audiovisual media platforms. The Canada Media Fund receives financial contributions from the Government and Canada’s cable, satellite and Internet protocol television distributors.

With Canadians increasingly watching content online, contributions from the broadcasting sector to the Canada Media Fund have started to decrease in step with their declining revenues. To address this issue, the Government has committed to increase its contribution in order to maintain the level of funding in the Canada Media Fund.

The Government proposes to provide $172 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $42.5 million per year ongoing, to maintain the level of funding in the Canada Media Fund at the 2016–17 level. While the actual Government contributions will fluctuate depending on the broadcasting sector revenues, this approach will provide a stable source of funding to develop Canadian content and support good jobs, including for our writers, producers, directors, actors and crews.

Supporting Local Journalism

As more and more people get their news online, and share their interests directly through social media, many communities have been left without local newspapers to tell their stories.

To ensure trusted, local perspectives as well as accountability in local communities, the Government proposes to provide $50 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to one or more independent non-governmental organizations that will support local journalism in underserved communities. The organizations will have full responsibility to administer the funds, respecting the independence of the press.

Further, consistent with the advice laid out in the Public Policy Forum’s report on news in the digital age, over the next year the Government will be exploring new models that enable private giving and philanthropic support for trusted, professional, non-profit journalism and local news. This could include new ways for Canadian newspapers to innovate and be recognized to receive charitable status for not-for-profit provision of journalism, reflecting the public interest that they serve.

More Women and Girls in Sport

Canada’s women and girl athletes do us proud at high-performance sport events, and regularly achieve podium success at Senior World Championships, and Olympic and Paralympic Games. However, fewer Canadian women and girls participate in sport and physical activity than men and boys—Statistics Canada estimates that in 2010 approximately one-third of Canadian men and one-sixth of Canadian women regularly participated in sport. Men are also approximately two to three times more likely to be coaches, officials or in other leadership positions than women.

We need to create an environment where women and girls feel comfortable engaging in physical activity and sport—at all ages and all levels. To do so, we need to better understand why women and girls choose not to participate in sport, or move into the senior ranks of coaching or management of sports, and then work to remove the barriers that exist.

This is why through Budget 2018, the Government is setting a target to achieve gender equality in sport at every level by 2035, and proposes to provide an initial $30 million over three years to support data and research and innovative practices to promote women and girls’ participation in sport, and provide support to national sports organizations to promote the greater inclusion of women and girls in all facets of sport.

Supporting ParticipACTION

Inactivity is now the fourth leading cause of death worldwide, responsible for an estimated 3.2 million deaths each year. In Canada, the vast majority of Canadians do not meet recommended levels of physical activity, with 9 out of 10 children and youth not meeting Canadian Physical Activity Guidelines. ParticipACTION is a national non-profit organization, originally established in 1971, whose mission is to make physical activity a vital part of everyday life.

The Government proposes to provide $25 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, for ParticipACTION to increase participation in daily physical activity among Canadians.

Supporting Special Olympics

Special Olympics is a global grassroots movement, bringing community programs and competition opportunities to more than 4.5 million children, youth and adults with intellectual disabilities across 170 countries. Special Olympics Canada is dedicated to enriching the lives of Canadians with an intellectual disability through sport.

The Government proposes to provide $16 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $2 million per year ongoing, for Special Olympics Canada to sustain its empowering movement, which supports more than 45,000 children, youth and adults in Canada with intellectual disabilities through its extraordinary network of more than 21,000 volunteers.

Revitalizing National Capital Commission Assets

The National Capital Commission (NCC) is a federal Crown corporation that is responsible for parkways, pathways, buildings and bridges in the National Capital Region. Each year, millions of visitors come to Canada’s capital to use and appreciate historic sites and parklands maintained by the NCC, including Confederation Boulevard (Canada’s ceremonial route), Parliament Hill and Gatineau Park. To ensure these infrastructure assets continue to remain safe and enjoyable for current and future generations of visitors to Canada’s capital, the Government will invest $55 million over two years, on a cash basis, in support of critical repair and maintenance work on its portfolio of fixed assets.

A New Partnership Between Library and Archives Canada and the Ottawa Public Library

The Government also proposes to provide $73.3 million over six years, on a cash basis, starting in 2018–19, with $4.0 million per year ongoing, to support the construction and ongoing operations of a new joint facility that will house Library and Archives Canada and the Ottawa Public Library. This represents the Government’s share of the project, with the balance expected to be provided by the City of Ottawa. This new building will be an iconic community hub, a single door to the national library and archives, and a world-class public library in Canada's capital city which will increase citizen participation in the community and improve access to Canada's history, culture and collective knowledge. It is expected that the new building will be completed by 2023.

Supporting the Canadian Museum for Human Rights

The Canadian Museum for Human Rights, one of Canada’s national museums, works to explore the subject of human rights, with special but not exclusive reference to Canada, in order to enhance the public's understanding of human rights.

In order to ensure that the museum has adequate funding to deliver on its mandate, including promoting respect for others and encouraging reflection and dialogue, the Government proposes to provide $35 million over six years, starting in 2018–19, to support the museum’s operations.

Good Governance

The Government of Canada is committed to evidence-based decision-making, whether it applies to a government agency spending taxpayer dollars or to engaging citizens to participate in democratic life. Equipping governments and Canadians with sound data and up-to-date information are essential to a healthy democracy. For this reason, the Government is taking action to increase the quantity and quality of information that is available to Canadians, while improving the delivery of government services.

A New Process for Federal Election Leaders’ Debates

Leaders’ debates play an essential role in Canada’s federal elections by engaging Canadians in the election campaigns and helping to inform their voting decisions. Over the past 50 years, the way leaders’ debates have been negotiated have put at risk the structure and potential usefulness of leaders’ debates.

The Government proposes to provide $6 million over two years, to be repeated every pre-election and election year, to support a new process that would ensure that federal leaders’ debates are organized in the public interest and improve Canadians’ knowledge of the parties, their leaders and their policy positions. In the coming months, the Minister of Democratic Institutions will bring forward potential approaches to leaders’ debates. The Government may introduce legislation to implement the approach taken to establish the new process for leaders’ debates.

Upholding the Integrity of Canada’s Elections

Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to provide $7.1 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, and $1.5 million per year ongoing, to support the work of the Office of the Commissioner of Canada Elections. This funding will help ensure that the Canadian electoral process continues to uphold the highest standards of democracy by all Canadians, political entities, businesses and individuals alike, now and into the future.

Renewing and Modernizing Statistics Canada

The Government is committed to evidence-based decision-making to support economic growth. A whole-of-government approach to data will seek to improve how the federal government collects, uses and shares data. It will be supported by the expertise of a renewed and modernized Statistics Canada, while ensuring that Canadians' privacy remains protected. As part of this approach, the Government proposes to provide $41 million over five years to Statistics Canada, starting in 2018–19, with $4.4 million per year ongoing, in support of the vision. The Government will also explore further options, including through legislation, to ensure Statistics Canada can respond to data needs of the 21 st century.

Beyond the modernization of the agency, it has become clear that the Government needs to fill gaps in knowledge for new and emerging cross-border services industries, such as content streaming services, which are becoming increasingly important to the Canadian economy. The Government proposes to provide $15.1 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $3.0 million per year ongoing, to Statistics Canada to address data gaps in international trade in services, including international trade in digital services and products. Better data will contribute to the Government’s commitment to produce high-quality information that is accessible and relevant to interested Canadians and will support its commitment to evidence-based policy-making. This is in addition to the $6.7 million over five years, outlined in Chapter 1, to create a new Centre for Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Statistics.

Statistics Canada has a mandate to conduct the Census of Population and Census of Agriculture every five years, both of which produce objective, high-quality statistical information that is vital to all levels of government, the private sector, academia and not-for-profit entities. Statistics Canada will conduct the next census in 2021, building on the successes of the 2016 Census of Population, which had the highest response in history to the long form component and set a world record for Internet response. The Government proposes to provide $767.3 million over 10 years, starting in 2018–19, to Statistics Canada to conduct the 2021 Census of Population. The Government also proposes to provide $49.4 million over six years, starting in 2018–19, to Statistics Canada to conduct the 2021 Census of Agriculture.

In order to obtain more inclusive data on sex and gender, Statistics Canada officials have been working with LGBTQ2 organizations to adjust Census of Population questions and response options to better reflect how people identify themselves, for example, by allowing respondents to answer in a non-binary fashion. This will provide critical information to help understand and meet the needs of LGBTQ2 Canadians.

Improving Client Services at the Canada Revenue Agency

Providing excellent service to Canadians is a top priority for the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA). Over the past two years, the Government has made significant investments to improve the timeliness and responsiveness of service. While progress has been made, Canadians continue to face unacceptable delays and challenges in dealing with the CRA. More needs to be done to make the Agency and its services, fairer, more helpful and easier to use.

A More Client-Centred Approach

To effect systemic change, the Government will undertake a comprehensive departmental review of the CRA’s service model. This review will examine all aspects of the Agency’s work in order to ensure that Canadians interacting with the CRA feel like valued clients, not just taxpayers. Further details about this review will be announced in the coming months.

While this review proceeds, the Government will continue to invest through Budget 2018 to improve the quality and availability of services offered by the Agency.

The Government is proposing $206.0 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $33.6 million per year ongoing, for the CRA to address the Government’s commitments to service excellence in three key areas.

Improving Telephone Services

The CRA answers roughly 20 million calls in a typical year, but for a number of years, Canadians have been frustrated by frequent busy signals, dropped calls and long wait times. Building on progress made through Budget 2016 funding, the Government is proposing additional funding to enhance telephone technology and hire more agents. This will mean fewer delays, and more timely and responsive services. The Government will also make investments to improve the way the CRA monitors agent feedback and to provide additional training to ensure that Canadians get the correct information they need.

Enhancing the Community Volunteer Income Tax Program

The Community Volunteer Income Tax Program is a great example of what can be achieved when community organizations come together to help Canadians. Through this program, community organizations host tax preparation clinics and arrange for volunteers to prepare income tax and benefit returns for individuals free of charge with modest or low incomes. Last year, over 700,000 individuals were helped by over 2,800 participating organizations.

Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to double the size of the program, helping hundreds of thousands more individuals complete their taxes and access benefits to which they are entitled. This expansion will include funding for additional “year-round” benefit clinics and more outreach activities to vulnerable population segments including seniors, newcomers, people with disabilities, youth and Indigenous communities.

With total annual ongoing investments of $13 million in Budget 2016 and Budget 2018, the Government has quadrupled funding to support the Community Volunteer Income Tax Program in recent years.

Strengthening Digital Services

The majority of Canadians prefer to interact with government through the CRA website, as nearly 90 per cent of tax returns in Canada are filed electronically and roughly 77 per cent of payments are completed online. CRA online services are used by millions of Canadians every year to apply for the Canada Child Benefit, ask a question about their small business or get help filing their taxes, for example. A secure, reliable and modern online system is vital to the service that the CRA provides to Canadians.

Budget 2018 investments will update and modernize information technology infrastructure to deliver a more user-friendly experience, allowing Canadians to easily find the tax and benefit information they need, whether as an individual, business owner or tax representative. Improvements will also ensure that online services remain available and uninterrupted, even during peak periods. Moreover, the online interface with Revenu Québec will be further strengthened in order to facilitate the provision of the same level of digital services for the residents of Quebec as in the rest of the country.

Clarifying the Rules on Political Activities by Charities

The Government has pledged to allow charities to do their work on behalf of Canadians free from political harassment, and promised to clarify the rules governing political activity, with an understanding that charities make an important contribution to public policy. An expert panel was created to study the issue of political activities by charities, and in 2017 this panel provided a series of recommendations to the Government based on consultations held with charities. The Government will provide a response to this report in the coming months.

Stabilizing and Future Transformation of the Federal Government’s Pay Administration (Phoenix)

Canada’s public servants deserve to be paid properly and on time for their important work. In early 2016, the Phoenix pay system for federal public servants was implemented following years of planning and development as part of a broader initiative originally intended to save money. Since that time, it has been obvious that the outcomes have been unacceptable for both the Government and its employees. The Transformation of Pay Administration Initiative launched in 2009 was under-resourced and suffered from poor planning and implementation. The Government is doing everything it can to make this right.

To date, the Government has committed more than $460 million to implement the Phoenix pay system and resolve subsequent issues. Over the last year and a half, the Government has hired several hundred people to rebuild capacity that was lost due to the previously flawed business plan. In addition, action has also been taken to reimburse employees who have incurred personal expenses as a result of pay issues. However, serious issues and challenges with the Phoenix pay system continue, and too many federal public servants are not being properly paid.

Through Budget 2018, the Government is committing to the next steps in addressing the ongoing challenges of the Phoenix pay system, including announcing its intention to eventually move away from Phoenix and begin development of the next generation of the federal government’s pay system, one that is better aligned with the complexity of the federal government pay structure. In this context, the Government proposes to provide an additional investment of $16 million over two years, beginning in 2018–19, to work with experts, federal public sector unions and technology providers on a way forward for a new pay system.

In the interim, the Government will continue to address the existing pay challenges. To this end, Budget 2018 proposes an investment of $431.4 million over six years, starting in 2017–18, to continue making progress on Phoenix issues, including hiring additional staff to support the pay system, bringing the number of employees working on pay issues at the Pay Centre and satellite offices to more than 1,500. This compares to the 550 employees that were originally intended to handle all pay issues when the new pay system was launched. Furthermore, this additional funding would go towards hiring more staff within departments to better assist employees with payroll issues as they arise. This would mean that public servants also have better access to a broader range of supports in the workplace.

Budget 2018 also proposes to provide $5.5 million over two years, starting in 2017–18, to the Canada Revenue Agency for the processing of federal government employee individual income tax reassessments that are required due to Phoenix pay issues, and for handling related telephone enquiries.

While the Phoenix pay system has been underpaying some public servants, it has also been paying others too much. Under current legislation, any employee who receives an overpayment in respect of a previous year is required to pay back the gross amount to their employer and recover excess withholdings from the Canada Revenue Agency. Public servants in this situation can rest assured that they will not have to start repaying until after the Canada Revenue Agency processes their tax return and refunds the excess withholdings (or credits them against a tax liability). At the same time, the Government is reviewing the legislation and will engage key stakeholders to assess the feasibility of changes to the legislation that would permit any private or public sector employee in this situation to repay the amount net of withholdings, starting for the 2018 taxation year and forward.

Finally, to address the real mental and emotional stress and unacceptable financial impacts on public servants, the Government has initiated discussions with public service representatives to address the numerous grievances and legal actions. Similarly, the Government will also take action to reimburse missing and inaccurate dues that are owing to public sector unions.

Improving Service Delivery

Canadians expect government services to be of high quality, accessible, secure and digitally enabled. The Government will make significant new investments to bolster the backbone of federal government operations, and ensure that Canadians receive the services that they need and deserve.

For example, building on investments of $12.1 million announced in Budget 2017, Employment and Social Development Canada is exploring modern approaches to service delivery, beginning with Employment Insurance (EI). Through the modernization of benefit delivery, the Government will improve Canadians’ access to services and benefits, including speeding up application processes.

In addition, the Government is committed to minimizing the administrative burden on employers. To this end, Employment and Social Development Canada is working with stakeholders to develop ways to streamline employer reporting obligations under the EI program.

The Government proposes legislative amendments respecting service delivery by the Government to the public and partner entities, including e-service delivery.

Predictable Funding for Employment Insurance Service Delivery

Timely access to EI benefits is critical to help Canadians navigate a job loss or other life events. To meet the demands of increased EI claims volumes, the Government has increased funding for EI administration in the last two years. As a result, in 2016–17, 83 per cent of EI claimants received EI benefits or notification of their claim status within 28 days of filing.

The Government proposes to make available up to $90 million over three years, starting in 2018–19, for EI claims processing and service delivery. Funding will be linked to EI claims volumes and will provide responsiveness to changing economic conditions. This will ensure that EI recipients continue to receive timely and accurate benefit payments.

Employment Insurance Call Centre Accessibility

EI call centres play a key role in delivering EI benefits, allowing Canadians to obtain information and assistance from agents who know the EI program. Building on investments of $73 million over two years announced in Budget 2016, the Government proposes to provide an additional $127.7 million over three years, starting in 2018–19, to further improve accessibility and ensure Canadians receive timely and accurate information and assistance with EI benefits.

Part 4: Security and Access to Justice

Whether through the guarantee of a fair and equitable justice system, or the knowledge that their private information is secure, Canadians deserve to feel safe and protected in a rapidly changing world.

An interconnected world powered by new technologies offers great benefits to Canadian families and tremendous opportunities to businesses, small and large. In a digital and globally connected world, the Government is taking action to promote our shared values, bolster services to Canadians and strengthen their protection, at home, abroad, and online, including establishing this country’s first comprehensive cyber security plan.

A strong, safe and secure Canada means our institutions are working effectively with the resources they need. This budget commits to a number of measures that bolster the efficiency of Canada’s safety and security institutions without compromising our shared values as an open, inclusive and welcoming society.

Access to Justice

Canadians should have every confidence that their justice system protects their rights and treats them fairly. Access to justice is not only about having an efficient and effective court system, it is also about having access to information, services and processes that enable Canadians to better understand and exercise their legal rights.

The Government recognizes that access to justice is a foundation of Canadian society and will invest in strengthening the Canadian judiciary, supporting Canada’s court system, and enhancing openness and transparency. Together, these measures reinforce the Government's strong commitments to respecting the rule of law and to upholding a justice system that is accessible, fair and efficient.

Expanding Unified Family Courts

Unified Family Courts aim to simplify family justice procedures for Canadians experiencing issues including separation, divorce, support and custody disputes. With access to Unified Family Courts, family law issues are considered under one court system, rather than two, which helps streamline the process and can help reduce the stress and confusion that families may face during this time. In addition, Unified Family Courts use specialized judges who are familiar with the sensitive nature of family law issues and offer a range of programs and support services to families. The combination of these specialized courts and enhanced services for families can help resolve issues more efficiently.

To enhance access to justice and improve outcomes for a significant number of Canadian families, the Government proposes to provide $77.2 million over four years, starting in 2019–20, and $20.8 million per year ongoing, to support the expansion of Unified Family Courts, creating 39 new judicial positions in Alberta, Ontario, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland and Labrador. This expansion will create a more streamlined process for those who rely on these services. The Government intends to introduce corresponding legislative amendments to create these new judicial positions to enhance Unified Family Courts.

The Government of Canada is committed to promoting access to justice for all Canadians. To that end, the Government’s plan to strengthen the Canadian judiciary proposes:

Supporting the creation of six new judicial positions for the Ontario Superior Court of Justice and one position for the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal ($17.1 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, and $3.7 million per year ongoing). These resources build on Budget 2017 investments and will help improve the administration of justice and the efficiency of the court system in both criminal and civil matters. The Government intends to introduce legislative amendments to create these new judicial positions, as well as to address two changes for which funding has already been provided (the conversion of one Federal Court judge position into an Associate Chief Justice position, and the addition of another judge to the Federal Court).

Ensuring that a robust process remains in place to allow Canadians to voice concerns and submit complaints about judicial conduct to the Canadian Judicial Council and the Office of the Commissioner for Federal Judicial Affairs ($6.0 million over two years, beginning in 2018–19). These investments support the judicial discipline process through which allegations of judicial misconduct are investigated

Funding for the Independent Advisory Board for Supreme Court of Canada Judicial Appointments to effectively carry out a non-partisan, independent process to identify judicial candidates of the highest caliber —who are functionally bilingual and representative of the diversity of our country ($0.3 million in 2017–18 to the Office of the Commissioner for Federal Judicial Affairs).

The Government also proposes to support Canada’s courts system by:

Helping ensure the smooth functioning of the Supreme Court of Canada , and reinforcing continued confidence in the Canadian judicial system ($9.6 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $1.9 million per year thereafter, to the Office of the Registrar of the Supreme Court of Canada).

Providing investments to the Courts Administration Service in support of Canada’s federal courts. This funding will primarily support judicial and registry services and will better enable the federal courts to address their growing and increasingly complex caseload ($41.9 million over five years, and $9.3 million per year ongoing, to the Courts Administration Service).

Proposed investments through Budget 2018 will also enhance Canadians’ access to justice by:

Enhancing the capacity of the Office of the Information Commissioner to resolve complaints about the handling of public access to information requests ($2.9 million in 2018–19 to the Office of the Information Commissioner). This funding reinforces the Government’s commitment to openness and transparency concerning access to information.

Supporting access to justice in the official language of one’s choice with funding for the Access to Justice in Both Official Languages Support Fund ($10.0 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $2.0 million per year ongoing, to the Department of Justice Canada).

Combatting Gender-Based Violence and Harassment

The Government supports provinces that deliver legal aid services to asylum seekers in need of representation during the immigration process. Often, asylum seekers have fled their countries because of a fear of persecution and an inability to return home. Budget 2017 provided funding to enhance immigration and refugee legal aid, in partnership with provinces. Through Budget 2018, this Government proposes to build on these investments and provide an additional $12.8 million for legal aid services to asylum seekers in 2018–19. This investment will help ensure that eligible asylum seekers continue to have access to legal aid.

Violence and harassment can have lifelong impacts on an individual’s physical and mental health and are unacceptable, regardless of whom they affect and which form they take.

While anyone can be a victim of violence and harassment, women and girls face a greater risk of certain types of violence, including sexual assault and intimate partner violence, as well as sexual harassment and human trafficking. In addition, some individuals may be especially vulnerable, including young women, newcomers, Indigenous women, LGBTQ2 people, and women with disabilities. The Government remains committed to amending the Criminal Code to introduce a reverse onus on bail for individuals with previous convictions of intimate partner violence. The Government plans to work closely with provinces and territories in the coming months on this issue.

The Government recognizes that prevention is critical to ending gender-based violence, that survivors and their families need support, and that the legal and justice systems must be improved to respond to gender-based violence. Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes new funding to address these areas.

The Government is also committed to ensuring that Canadians have access to the supports they need to effectively navigate Canada’s justice system—and that Canada’s judiciary reflects our country’s diversity.

Fewer women are victims of intimate partner violence and sexual assault

Fewer women are victims of homicide by intimate partners

Fewer victims of human trafficking

Increased police reporting of violent crimes

More workplaces are harassment-free

Child and spousal support orders are enforced

National Human Trafficking Hotline

Human trafficking is a heinous crime that disproportionately affects women and girls, particularly Indigenous, newcomer and low-income individuals. The Government is committed to putting an end to gender-based violence and proposes to provide $14.51 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, and $2.89 million per year ongoing, to Public Safety Canada to combat human trafficking by establishing a National Human Trafficking Hotline, including an online portal and a referral mechanism to social services and law enforcement. This hotline will help protect those vulnerable to being trafficked and enable victims to access the necessary social and law enforcement services they need. As this initiative proceeds, the Government will work with provinces and territories to ensure effective implementation.

Taking Action to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence, Harassment and Discrimination

Through Budget 2017, the Government provided $101 million over five years, starting in 2017–18, towards a Gender-Based Violence Strategy. Funding includes:

$77.5 million over five years, and $16 million per year ongoing, to Status of Women Canada for a Gender-Based Violence Knowledge Centre, data collection and research, and programming;

$9.5 million over five years, and $2 million per year ongoing, to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support implementing and testing ways to prevent gender-based violence, including child maltreatment and teen dating violence;

$6 million over five years, and $1.3 million per year ongoing, to Public Safety Canada to enhance efforts to address online child exploitation;

$4 million over five years, and $0.8 million per year ongoing, to the Department of National Defence to increase funding for Family Crisis Teams, to support members of the Canadian Armed Forces and their families affected by violence;

$2.4 million over five years, and $0.6 million per year ongoing, to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police for cultural competency training for federal law enforcement officers; and,

$1.5 million over five years to Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada to enhance the Settlement Program.

As movements such as #MeToo and #TimesUp have demonstrated through the powerful stories of survivors, gender-based violence, harassment and discrimination continue to impact women at home, at work and throughout Canadian society. The Government has a vital role to play in helping to create a more equitable society, free from discrimination of any kind.

Everyone deserves to live a life free from violence. While gender-based violence is often thought of through the lens of violence against women and girls, many Canadians face violence every day simply because of their gender expression, gender identity or perceived gender.

The negative impacts of gender-based violence reach far beyond any specific population. While gender-based violence significantly influences the health, social and economic conditions of the individuals who directly experience it, it also has long-lasting and negative results for family members, friends and entire communities.

The Government proposes to provide an additional $86.0 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $20.0 million per year ongoing, to expand Canada’s Strategy to Address Gender-Based Violence. New investments will focus on:

Preventing teen dating violence.

Enhancing and developing preventative bullying and cyber bullying initiatives.

Equipping health professionals to provide appropriate care to victims.

Enhancing support for the National Child Exploitation Coordination Centre to increase investigative capacity of the RCMP.

Expanding the High Needs Victims Fund so that more organizations, such as rape crisis centres, are better able to help population groups who are at the highest risk of experiencing violence. This investment will double the support provided to this initiative in Budget 2017.

Providing support to sexual assault centres in close proximity to Canadian Forces bases so that members of the Canadian Armed Forces have access to a full spectrum of supports to address gender-based violence. This builds on other investments in family support services through Strong, Secure, Engaged , the Government’s new defence policy.

People self-identifying as homosexual or bisexual are three times more likely than heterosexuals to self-report having experienced violent victimization (i.e. sexual assault, robbery or physical assault).

LGBTQ2 (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning, intersex and two-spirit) and non-binary people often face discrimination, harassment and other harms, including hate crimes, as societal ideas about heteronormative gender roles, as well as ideas about appropriate gender performances, work together to create discriminatory experiences for members of LGBTQ2 communities.

LGBTQ2 individuals are more at risk of sexual assault than heterosexual individuals. Canadians who identified as homosexual or bisexual had a rate of sexual assault that was six times higher than those who identified as heterosexual.

In addition to providing more comprehensive support towards the Federal Strategy to Address Gender-based Violence, the Government is proposing targeted new measures to combat violence and harassment at home and in the workplace.

Harassment and violence prevents Canadians—particularly women, young people, LGBTQ2 persons, Indigenous Peoples and visible minorities—from participating to the fullest of their potential. Harassment and violence at work stands in the way of growth and success by contributing to productivity loss, turnover, stress and anxiety, and lower job satisfaction.

On November 7, 2017, the Government of Canada introduced Bill C-65 to create a single, integrated framework that will protect federally regulated employees from harassment and violence in the workplace. The Government will provide $34.9 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $7.4 million per year ongoing, to support Bill C-65. This will ensure that federally regulated workplaces are free from harassment and violence.

The Government also proposes to establish a Centre of Diversity, Inclusion and Wellness within the public service that will have, as part of its mandate, to better support public servants in dealing with sexual harassment in the workplace within the public service.

Addressing Corporate Integrity

Corporate wrongdoing imposes significant economic and social costs. It undermines competition, threatens the integrity of markets, puts up barriers to economic growth, increases the cost and risk of doing business, and undermines public and investor confidence. Many governments, including the Government of Canada, are committed to taking action against improper, unethical and illegal business practices and holding companies to account for such conduct. That is why the Government has already committed to increasing Canadian companies’ compliance with human rights standards abroad with the launch of the Canadian Ombudsperson for Responsible Enterprise.

Based on the consultation conducted in the fall of 2017, the Government intends to further strengthen its approach to addressing corporate wrongdoing, enhancing the government-wide Integrity Regime and introducing legislation for Canadian Deferred Prosecution Agreements, to be implemented through Judicial Remediation Orders (JRO), as an additional tool to hold corporate offenders to account. The JRO would establish a regime to sanction criminal conduct appropriately and deter wrongdoing. These actions are in line with those taken by some of our key trading partners such as the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia and France.

Detailed proposals for enhancements to the Integrity Regime and the introduction of a new JRO regime will be brought forward in the near future.

A Strong Sanctions Regime

Sanctions are an important foreign policy tool for Canada: they serve as a way to respond to rapidly developing international crises, violations of international peace and security, and, with the new Justice for Victims of Corrupt Foreign Officials Act (Sergei Magnitsky Law) , to gross violations of human rights or acts of significant corruption. The Government proposes to provide $22.2 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, with $4.3 million per year thereafter, to Global Affairs Canada and the Canada Border Services Agency to strengthen Canada’s sanctions system, including funds for the development of sanctions policy, coordination with international partners, and providing guidance to Canadians on sanctions obligations.

Ensuring Security and Prosperity in the Digital Age

The digital age has revolutionized how Canadians live as well as how our institutions function. Digital technologies have changed the way we work, how we shop, how we access services—including government and financial services. These changes have brought with them vast benefits and new challenges, including efforts to preserve cyber security and protect the privacy of Canadians. Cyber-attacks are becoming more pervasive, increasingly sophisticated and ever more effective. Successful cyber-attacks have the potential to expose the private information of Canadians, cost Canadian businesses millions of dollars, and potentially put Canada’s critical infrastructure networks at risk.

With this budget, the Government of Canada is implementing a plan for security and prosperity in the digital age to protect against cyber-attacks. The Government proposes significant investments of $507.7 million over five years, and $108.8 million per year thereafter, to fund a new National Cyber Security Strategy. The Strategy focuses on three principal goals:

Ensure secure and resilient Canadian systems.

Build an innovative and adaptive cyber ecosystem.

Support effective leadership and collaboration between different levels of Canadian government, and partners around the world.

The Government will work alongside key partners in order to implement this plan: other levels of government, the business community, academia and trusted international partners. Canada will work to proactively solve mutual cyber issues, raising the cyber security bar for all Canadians.

Improving Cyber Security

Canada’s plan for security in the digital age starts with a strong federal cyber governance system to protect Canadians and their sensitive personal information. To that end, the Government proposes to commit $155.2 million over five years, and $44.5 million per year ongoing, to the Communications Security Establishment to create a new Canadian Centre for Cyber Security.

By consolidating operational cyber expertise from across the federal government under one roof, the new Canadian Centre for Cyber Security will establish a single, unified Government of Canada source of unique expert advice, guidance, services and support on cyber security operational matters, providing Canadian citizens and businesses with a clear and trusted place to turn to for cyber security advice. In order to establish the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security, the Government will introduce legislation to allow various Government cyber security functions to consolidate into the new Centre. Federal responsibility to investigate potential criminal activities will remain with the RCMP.

To bolster Canada’s ability to fight cybercrime, the Government also proposes to provide $116.0 million over five years, and $23.2 million per year ongoing, to the RCMP to support the creation of the National Cybercrime Coordination Unit. The National Cybercrime Coordination Unit will create a coordination hub for cybercrime investigations in Canada and will work with international partners on cybercrime. The Unit will also establish a national public reporting mechanism for Canadian citizens and businesses to report cybercrime incidents to law enforcement.

The Canadian Centre for Cyber Security will:

Bring together federal operational cyber expertise from across the federal government under one roof.

Provide Canadian citizens and businesses with a clear and trusted place to turn to for cyber security information.

Advance partnerships and dialogue with other jurisdictions, the business community, academia and international partners.

The National Cybercrime Coordination Unit will:

Act as a coordination hub for cybercrime investigations in Canada and work with partners internationally.

Provide digital investigative advice and guidance to Canadian law enforcement.

Establish a national public reporting mechanism for Canadian citizens and business to report cybercrime incidents to law enforcement.

In addition to funding the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security and the National Cybercrime Coordination Unit, the Government also proposes to provide an additional $236.5 million over five years, and $41.2 million per year ongoing, to further support Canada’s new National Cyber Security Strategy. Taken together, these investments will allow Canadians to continue to benefit from digital connections in a way that protects them, their personal information and our infrastructure from cybercrime.

Ensure secure and resilient Canadian cyber systems by enhancing the Government of Canada’s ability to investigate cybercrime, developing threat assessments, keeping critical infrastructure safe, and work in collaboration with the financial and energy sectors on bolstering their cyber security;

Invest in an innovative and adaptive cyber ecosystem by supporting work-integrated cyber learning placements for students and helping businesses improve their cyber security posture through the creation of a voluntary cyber certification program; and,

Strengthen leadership, governance and collaboration by taking the lead, both at home and abroad, to advance cyber security in Canada, working closely with provincial, territorial, private sector and trusted international partners.

For Canadians:

A clear trusted federal source for cyber security information.

Practical tips to apply to everyday online activities.

Heightened awareness of malicious cyber activity.

For Canadian business:

Increased cyber security guidance for small and medium-sized enterprises.

Tools and resources to improve cyber resilience.

For systems that Canadians rely on each day, such as online banking, electricity grids and telecommunications networks:

Bolstered security and a more rapid, coordinated and coherent federal response to cyber threats.

Enabling Digital Services to Canadians

To provide Canadians with important programs and services, federal government organizations depend on Shared Services Canada to provide modern and reliable information technology (IT) infrastructure and services.

To modernize/enhance the Government’s digital services, Budget 2018 proposes significant investments in Shared Services Canada and the Communications Security Establishment to ensure that these organizations are properly resourced to address evolving IT needs and opportunities, and proactively address cyber security threats. This includes:

$2.2 billion over six years, starting in 2018–19, with $349.8 million per year thereafter, to improve the management and provision of IT services and infrastructure within the Government of Canada, and to support related cyber security measures.

$110 million over six years, starting in 2018–19, to be accessed by Shared Services Canada’s partner departments and agencies to help them migrate their applications from older data centres into more secure modern data centres or cloud solutions.

A majority of the funding for these initiatives will be reallocated from federal organizations that receive mandatory services from Shared Services Canada. The ability of the Government’s IT systems to protect Canadians’ data and meet future demands will depend on a strong IT governance structure. To support this, the Government will redefine the role of the Government of Canada Chief Information Officer.

Enhancing the Security of Taxpayer Information

Security breaches involving the loss of private personal information place Canadians at risk of identity theft. As the administrator of Canada’s tax, benefits, and related programs for governments across Canada, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) safeguards the personal and financial information of tens of millions of Canadians.

As a result of the enhancements made to the suite of online options available to Canadians, the CRA’s systems are housing, processing and transmitting growing volumes of taxpayer data. Through Budget 2018, the Government will provide the CRA with $30.0 million over five years to enhance the security measures that protect the confidentiality of this sensitive information.

Investment Canada Act —National Security Review of Foreign Investments

Canada is open for business. Our competitive business environment is an attractive draw for foreign investors, and increased investments mean more good, well-paying jobs for Canadians, and continued economic growth. The Investment Canada Act enables the Government to undertake a review of proposed foreign investments in order to determine if they uphold Canada’s national interests—both from a net benefit perspective and for national security purposes. Similar to Budget 2017, Budget 2018 proposes to provide $1.24 million for Public Safety Canada and the Canadian Security Intelligence Service to support continued operations related to the Investment Canada Act’s National Security Review Program. The National Security Review Program provides a robust framework for reviewing foreign investments for various reasons, such as to protect defence capabilities, safeguard the transfer of sensitive technologies, and ensure no potential involvement from organized crime.

Safeguarding the Integrity of Our Public Safety System

Public confidence in our safety, security and well-being is vital for an inclusive and peaceful society and a growing economy. It underpins Canada’s reputation as an ideal place to raise a family, invest or grow a business. Canada’s public safety institutions work hard to protect Canadians from those who threaten our safety and security. The Government proposes to invest nearly $775 million over five years to help our public safety institutions continue keeping us safe.

Supporting RCMP Frontline Operations

The RCMP is committed to preserving the peace, upholding the law, protecting Canadians and promoting safety and security. The scope of policing operations within the RCMP is constantly evolving to address new and emerging threats, including in the areas of cybercrime, serious and organized crime, and national security investigations. The Government proposes to invest $80 million in 2018–19 to reinforce existing RCMP policing operations. This funding also supports the recruitment and training of new RCMP cadets to help meet demands for new frontline federal officers in Canada.

The Government also proposes to invest $60.2 million over five years, and $9.5 million per year ongoing, for the RCMP to renew radio systems in four divisions: Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick and the National Capital Region. Two-way radios are a lifeline for frontline police officers. They continue to be the most available, secure and efficient communications tool for policing. Secure radios are also critical for maintaining officer safety, promoting interoperability with other first responders and, ultimately, protecting Canadians.

Taking Action Against Guns and Gangs

The federal government is establishing the Initiative to Take Action Against Guns and Gangs—a multi-pronged approach to tackle gun and gang activity in Canada. Specifically, the Government proposes to provide $327.6 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $100 million per year ongoing, to Public Safety Canada, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the Canada Border Services Agency . This Initiative, recently announced by the Minister of Public Safety, will bring together federal, provincial and territorial efforts to support community-level prevention and enforcement efforts, build and leverage unique federal expertise and resources to advance intelligence related to the illegal trafficking of firearms, and invest in border security to interdict illicit goods including guns and drugs. Funding would also be provided to Indigenous organizations to help build capacity through education, outreach and research, addressing the unique needs of Indigenous communities and urban populations. The Initiative will help reduce gun and gang violence so that Canadians can feel safe in their communities.

Preserving Canada’s Foreign Signals Intelligence Capability

The Communications Security Establishment is mandated to collect foreign signals intelligence to help inform the Government of Canada on matters of security, national defence and international affairs, reflecting the priorities set by the Government. In order to keep pace with rapid technological change that can challenge its ability to effectively collect foreign signals intelligence, the Government proposes to provide the Communications Security Establishment $225 million over four years, starting in 2020–21, and $62.1 million ongoing, to ensure this capability is preserved.

Critical Infrastructure Security

Efforts to enhance the resilience of our critical infrastructure systems and plan for unforeseen disruptions are essential for keeping Canadians and our communities safe. To this end, the Government proposes to provide Public Safety Canada with $1.4 million in 2018–19 to continue operations of the Regional Resilience Assessment Program and the Virtual Risk Analysis Cell. These programs support assessments of critical infrastructure facilities, such as energy grids, information and communication technology networks and hospitals. The Virtual Risk Analysis Cell also promotes online information sharing across the critical infrastructure community.

Support for the Correctional Service of Canada and the Office of the Correctional Investigator of Canada

The Correctional Service of Canada is responsible for the federal correctional system and protects public safety by actively encouraging and assisting offender reintegration. It provides correctional programming, opportunities for offender rehabilitation and practical skills development, and strengthening of community corrections. The Government proposes to invest $74.7 million in 2018–19 to enable the Correctional Service of Canada to continue existing operations in support of its mandate.

As the ombudsman for federally sentenced offenders, the Office of the Correctional Investigator serves Canadians and contributes to safe, lawful and humane corrections through independent oversight of the Correctional Service of Canada. The Office provides accessible, impartial and timely investigations of individual and systemic concerns in federal correctional facilities. To support this work, the Government proposes to provide the Office of the Correctional Investigator of Canada with $3.4 million over five years beginning in 2018–19, and $0.7 million per year ongoing. These funds will be used to enhance the Office’s investigative capacity, including its ability to delve more deeply into Indigenous corrections and the overrepresentation of Indigenous peoples within the federal correctional system.

Supporting Those Who Keep Our Communities Safe

Every day, public safety officers put their safety at risk to protect our communities. Often, an officer’s routine exposure to traumatic events puts them at a greater risk for operational stress injuries, including post-traumatic-stress injuries. In recognition of the daily sacrifices made by public safety officers across Canada, the Government is proposing measures to support research and treatment on post-traumatic stress injuries among public safety officers as well as targeted supports for federal police officers.

Support to Address Post-Traumatic Stress Injuries for Public Safety Officers

There is a lack of research dedicated to understanding post-traumatic stress injuries among public safety officers. This limits our ability to effectively support those who keep us safe. To address this knowledge gap, the Government proposes to provide $20 million over five years, beginning in 2018-19, to support a new national research consortium between the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Canadian Institute for Public Safety Research and Treatment. This new consortium will work to address the incidence of post-traumatic stress injuries among public safety officers.

Access to mental health supports can be particularly hard to attain for public safety officers in rural and remote areas. The Government proposes to invest $10 million over 5 years, starting in 2018-19, for Public Safety Canada to work with the Canadian Institute for Public Safety Research and Treatment to develop an Internet-based Cognitive Behavioural Therapy pilot as a means of providing greater access to care and treatment for public safety officers across Canada.

Supporting Mental Health for RCMP Police Officers

The Government is also committed to supporting the mental health and resilience of the RCMP so that it can continue to serve Canadians each and every day. To this end, the Government proposes to provide the RCMP with $21.4 million over five years, starting in 2018-19, to support the mental health needs of its officers.

Further Improving Mental Health Supports for Inmates

Through Budget 2017, the Government took an important step towards the goal of ensuring that offenders with mental health needs in federal correctional facilities receive the appropriate level of care. Challenges remain, however, in meeting the complex and varied needs of offenders, including for women inmates in federal corrections, whose numbers have grown by approximately 30 per cent over the last 10 years. Budget 2018 builds on the investments made in Budget 2017, proposing $20.4 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, and $5.6 million per year ongoing, for the Correctional Service of Canada to further support the mental health needs of federal inmates. Funds would largely be targeted towards providing enhanced mental health supports for women in federal correctional facilities across Canada.

Reopening the Penitentiary Farms at Joyceville and Collins Bay Institutions

To provide federal inmates with training opportunities to acquire new skills, while preparing for employment and successful reintegration and rehabilitation into the community, the Government proposes to invest $4.3 million over five years, beginning and 2018–19, to support the reopening of the Penitentiary Farms at the Joyceville and Collins Bay Institutions in Kingston, Ontario. The farms would be run by CORCAN, a key rehabilitation programming agency of the Correctional Service of Canada.

Borders and Migration

As an open and welcoming country, and as a trading nation that relies on the free flow of goods and services across borders for its economic success, it’s important to all Canadians that we manage the integrity of Canada’s borders in a way that protects Canadians while encouraging cross-border economic activity. Budget 2018 puts forward a number of measures to help maintain this balance without compromising Canada’s reputation or the values of Canadians. This includes ensuring that individuals from abroad who come to work and contribute to the Canadian economy are protected from abuse. This work also includes measures to invest in Canada’s aviation security.

Strengthening the Canada Border Services Agency

The Canada Border Services Agency is responsible for managing Canada’s borders by enforcing laws governing trade and travel and aiding legitimate cross-border traffic, while stopping people and goods that pose a potential threat to Canada. The Canada Border Services Agency strives to maintain a high standard of service and has worked to improve processing times for the efficient and secure flow of travellers. The Government proposes to invest $85.5 million in 2018–19, to enable the Canada Border Services Agency to continue existing operations in support of the Agency’s mandate.

Irregular Migration: Managing the Border

The Government of Canada is committed to protecting the safety of Canadians and keeping our borders secure. At the same time, people seeking asylum must be treated with compassion and afforded due process under Canadian and international law, and in keeping with our values as an open and welcoming country. To that end, the Government proposes to provide $173.2 million to support security operations at the Canada-U.S. border and the processing of asylum claimants arriving in 2018–19. Funding would be used to manage the increased number of people seeking asylum in Canada this year, many of whom arrive with their families seeking quick, safe and compassionate processing. Funds would be used to provide short-term processing and security screening supports at the border, as well as to support decision-making capacity for the Immigration and Refugee Board.

Safeguarding Canadians With an Enhanced Passenger Protect Program

The Passenger Protect Program works with air carriers to screen commercial passenger flights to, from and within Canada in order to protect safety at home and abroad. While the program is an important element of Canada’s national security framework, the Government has heard the concerns of families unfairly impacted by the program. The issue of children being unfairly targeted and encountering travel delays has been a source of particular frustration for parents. In response, the Government proposes to enhance the Passenger Protect Program with investments of $81.4 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $14.0 million per year ongoing, for the Canada Border Services Agency, Public Safety Canada and Transport Canada. These investments will be used to develop a rigorous centralized screening model and establish a redress mechanism for legitimate air travellers who are affected by the program. The enhanced program will help ensure that privacy and fairness concerns are addressed, while keeping Canadians safe.

Protecting Air Travellers

To ensure consistent and effective security screening of travellers and workers, the Government proposes to provide $236.4 million in 2018–19, with $2.4 million in remaining amortization, to the Canadian Air Transport Security Authority (CATSA). This funding will also allow CATSA to add new lanes for U.S. Pre-clearance of passengers at the Billy Bishop Toronto City Airport and the Quebec City Jean Lesage International Airport.

Protecting Temporary Foreign Workers

The Temporary Foreign Worker Program and the International Mobility Program are Canada's two programs that govern the entry of temporary foreign workers. Canada has an obligation to ensure these workers, who contribute to the labour market by providing the skills and expertise employers need when qualified Canadian workers are unavailable, are aware of their rights and are protected from abuse. The Government proposes to provide $194.1 million over five years, beginning in 2018–19, and $33.19 million per year ongoing, to ensure the rights of temporary foreign workers in Canada are protected and enforced through a robust compliance regime. Funding will support unannounced inspections under the Temporary Foreign Worker Program, the continued implementation of the International Mobility Program compliance regime, and the ongoing collection of labour market information related to open work permits.

In addition, the Government proposes to invest $3.4 million over two years, beginning in 2018–19, from Employment and Social Development Canada's existing resources to establish, on a pilot basis, a network of support organizations for temporary foreign workers dealing with potential abuse by their employers. This network would support these workers in reporting wrongdoing and provide information on their rights to temporarily remain and work in Canada free from harassment and abuse.



<<< source: chap-05-en.html >>>

“Gender equality is not only an issue for women and girls. All of us benefit when women and girls have the same opportunities as men and boys—and it’s on all of us to make that a reality.”

Budget 2018’s Gender Results Framework

Gender equality benefits us all. Women in the workforce have been one of the most powerful sources of economic growth in recent decades, helping strengthen the economy. In fact, over the last 40 years, more women in the workforce has accounted for about a third of Canada’s real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita growth.

[Chart 5.1 - Text version]

Having more women in the workforce has driven economic growth, boosted family incomes, and helped families join the middle class.

Yet there are still too many missed opportunities caused by gender gaps in a number of areas, including education and career options, full participation in the economy, and leadership. While these gaps are the result of many factors, taking action to address them is not just the right thing to do, it is the smart thing to do to strengthen the middle-class and grow Canada’s economy.

RBC Economics estimates that if men and women participated equally in the workforce, Canada’s GDP could be boosted by as much as 4 per cent, and could partially offset the expected effects of an aging population.

The Government recognizes the critical role that gender equality has in building a strong economy that works for everyone. Budgets are about making choices with limited resources. Gender budgeting is a conscious effort to understand how decisions affect different people differently, with a view to allocating government resources more equitably and efficiently. This is why gender budgeting matters. Through the deliberate and more consistent use of Gender-based Analysis Plus (GBA+), the Government is able to make evidence-based policy decisions that benefit all Canadians.

Building on Canada’s first ever Gender Statement in Budget 2017, the Government is introducing a new Gender Results Framework —a whole-of-government tool to track how Canada is currently performing, to help define what is needed to achieve greater equality and to determine how progress will be measured going forward. The framework reflects this government’s priorities for gender equality, highlighting the key issues that matter most. This chapter presents the details of this results framework and outlines how the Government’s plan is helping ensure that everyone has a real and fair chance at success. It also presents additional measures to strengthen the Government’s ability to conduct further GBA+ and gender budgeting in the future.

The Government also recognizes that identities are complex. Not all women experience inequality, and not all men experience privilege. Binary notions of gender do not work for all Canadians, and race, class, sexuality, and ability—among other facets—all intersect to profoundly impact how gender is experienced in daily life. The Government acknowledges that this budget—though ambitious—does not solve all complex inequalities, but it is an important step forward in data, analysis and resources.

Canada’s Commitment to Gender Budgeting

From the time the Government took office, it has been working to ensure GBA+ is applied comprehensively to all aspects of policy development and decision-making, and strengthening the quality of GBA+ with better data and the full consideration of impacts across a range of intersectional lenses.

With Budget 2018, Canada sets a new standard of gender budgeting as a core pillar of budget-making—legislating higher standards and making meaningful investments toward greater gender equality underpinned by clear objectives and strong evidence. This builds on Budget 2017’s first ever Gender Statement by better integrating gender in the budget priority-setting process, and strengthening the use of GBA+ in decision-making.

Going forward, the Government is committed to adopting a comprehensive and permanent approach to gender budgeting:

The Government will ask the Standing Committee on Procedure and House Affairs to examine making it a requirement that when any Minister of Finance tables a Budget in the House of Commons, a GBA+ analysis of the budget documents must be tabled concurrently.

Budget 2018 and future budgets under this Government will be guided by the new Gender Results Framework with its six pillars of i) Education and Skills Development, ii) Economic Participation and Prosperity, iii) Leadership and Democratic Participation, iv) Gender-Based Violence and Access to Justice, v) Poverty Reduction, Health and Well-Being, and vi) Gender Equality Around the World. The framework will outline meaningful indicators under each pillar to track success or failure.

Robust analysis will be supported by new investments to strengthen gender and diversity data.

The Government will introduce new GBA+ legislation to enshrine gender budgeting in the federal government’s budgetary and financial management processes, extending the reach of GBA+ to examine tax expenditures, federal transfers and the existing spending base, including the Estimates.

To conduct robust GBA+, access to gender-disaggregated data and intersecting factors is essential. This means not only data on men and women, but also data on gender-diverse people. The Government recognizes that this is a key challenge and will be investing in the collection and tracking of gender and diversity data.

To strengthen Canada’s ongoing capacity to apply the gender and diversity lens, the Government will make Status of Women Canada an official Department of the Government of Canada by introducing departmental legislation that solidifies and formalizes the important roles of Status of Women and its Minister.

Canada’s Gender Results Framework

Canada’s economic future depends on people having equal opportunity to reach their full potential, regardless of gender.

Gender Equality Goals for Canada

Education and Skills Development

Equal opportunities and diversified paths in education and skills development

More diversified educational paths and career choices

Reduced gender gaps in reading and numeracy skills among youth, including Indigenous youth

Equal lifelong learning opportunities for adults

Economic Participation and Prosperity

Equal and full participation in the economy

Increased labour market opportunities for women, especially women in underrepresented groups

Reduced gender wage gap

Increased full-time employment of women

Equal sharing of parenting roles and family responsibilities

Better gender balance across occupations

More women in higher-quality jobs, such as permanent and well-paid jobs

Leadership and Democratic Participation

Gender equality in leadership roles and at all levels of decision-making

More women in senior management positions, and more diversity in senior leadership positions

Increased opportunities for women to start and grow their businesses, and succeed on a global scale

More company board seats held by women, and more diversity on company boards

Greater representation of women and underrepresented groups in elected office and ministerial positions in national and sub-national governments

Increased representation of women and underrepresented groups in the judicial system

Gender Based Violence and Access to Justice

Eliminating gender-based violence and harassment, and promoting security of the person and access to justice

Workplaces are harassment free

Fewer women are victims of intimate partner violence and sexual assault

Fewer victims of childhood maltreatment

Fewer women killed by an intimate partner

Increased police reporting of violent crimes

Fewer Indigenous women and girls are victims of violence

Increased accountability and responsiveness of the Canadian justice system

Poverty Reduction, Health and Well Being

Reduced poverty and improved health outcomes

Fewer vulnerable individuals living in poverty

Fewer women and children living in food-insecure households

Fewer vulnerable individuals lacking stable, safe and permanent housing

Child and spousal support orders enforced

More years in good health

Improved mental health

Improved access to contraception for young people and reduced adolescent birth rate

Gender Equality Around the World

Promoting gender equality to build a more peaceful, inclusive, rules-based and prosperous world

Feminist international approach to all policies and programs, including diplomacy, trade, security and development

The Gender Results Framework is aligned with the Government of Canada’s policy of GBA+, ensuring that gender is considered in relation to other intersecting identity factors. Wherever possible, and with a view to collecting better data, intersecting identity factors will be considered in the above indicators.

Education and Skills Development

More diversified educational paths and career choices

Proportion of post-secondary qualification holders who are women, by field of study and qualification type

Proportion of post-secondary students who are women, by field of study and credential type

High school completion rate, by gender and for underrepresented groups (including Indigenous Peoples)

Reduced gender gaps in reading and numeracy skills among youth, including Indigenous youth

High school reading and mathematics test scores, by gender, including those for Indigenous Peoples (based on Programme for International Student Assessment)

Equal lifelong learning opportunities for adults

Adults’ literacy and numeracy test scores, by gender (based on Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies)

Why This Matters

The knowledge-based economy demands a skilled, adaptable and diversified workforce to support Canada’s competitiveness and prosperity.

All Canadians should have the opportunity to make choices about their education based on their interests, aptitudes and economic goals without being constrained by gender-related expectations or prejudices.

Progress and Challenges

Canadian women and men are among the most educated in the world—ranking first among Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries in Post-Secondary Education by population. Women have made important headway, with about three-quarters of those aged 25 to 34 having completed college or university, compared to two-thirds of men of the same age. Higher levels of education among women have translated into higher wages. However, important gaps remain in both workforce participation and earnings. This partly reflects the different fields of study that women and men have pursued, and these choices are often skewed by established norms and institutional barriers formed around gender roles and identities.

[Figure 5.1 - Text version]

Young men account for two-thirds of post-secondary graduates in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). The difference is even greater in engineering and computer science, as well as the large majority of the skilled trades. In contrast, young women continue to make up three-quarters of enrolments and graduates in health care (such as nursing and pharmacy programs) and education.

Gender segregation in education has led to less gender diversity across occupations and has limited career opportunities for women.

Lifelong skills training and development is essential to prepare Canadians for the jobs of tomorrow and to address challenges such as the changing nature of work and disruptive technologies. A high school diploma has become essential. Canada does well in terms of high school completion rates, but certain groups of young people are in danger of being left behind, including Indigenous men, and men with disabilities. In general, boys are less likely than girls to graduate high school.

[Figure 5.2 - Text version]

Results to Date

Approximately one million students—half of whom are expected to be girls and young women—will learn digital skills through CanCode .

About one million youth per year—with an increasing focus on girls and Indigenous youth—are encouraged to pursue interests and careers in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) through PromoScience -funded organizations.

Approximately 40,000 women with children receive Canada Student Loan Program support each year and are able to afford post-secondary education due to enhancements to Canada Student Loans and Grants.

Budget 2018 Actions

Improving diversity in the research community through investments in the granting councils, data collection initiatives , early career researchers and new gender equity planning .

Increasing women’s representation in male-dominated trades through the Apprenticeship Incentive Grant for Women and the Pre-Apprenticeship Program .

Promoting equal access to training and jobs for Indigenous women through the Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program .

Helping women and underrepresented groups make informed career decisions by improving the quality of career information and program results .

Economic Participation and Prosperity

Increased labour market opportunities for women, especially women in underrepresented groups

Labour force participation rate, by gender (including recent immigrants)

Employment rate, by gender (including recent immigrants)

Reduced gender wage gap

Gender gap in median hourly wages

Gender gap in median annual employment income

Increased full-time employment of women

Proportion of workers in full-time jobs, by gender

Equal sharing of parenting roles and family responsibilities

Proportion of time spent on informal domestic and care work, by gender

Number of children in regulated child care spaces and/or early learning programs and/or benefitting from subsidies

Proportion of annual household income spent on child care, by economic family type

Better gender balance across occupations

Proportion of occupational group who are women, including recent immigrants

More women in higher-quality jobs, such as permanent and well-paid jobs

Proportion of persons employed in temporary, involuntary part-time, or low-wage jobs, by gender

Why This Matters

Every Canadian should have the opportunity to reach their full potential, contributing to, and benefitting from a strong growing economy.

Advancing women’s economic participation will drive economic growth, while boosting the income of Canadian families.

Economic independence means greater financial security of individuals and their families, helping people exercise control over their lives.

Progress and Challenges

The increasing number of women in the economy has been an important source of economic growth in Canada. Today, almost two-thirds of women aged 15 and over are in the labour force—more than ever before—compared with less than half in the late 1970s.

However, the overall labour force participation of women continues to lag that of men by about 10 percentage points. Beginning in 2000, progress toward gender equality in labour force participation stalled. Women continue to face unique barriers to entering and staying in the workforce. The impact of parenthood on work is still very different for women and men, reflecting an uneven sharing of care responsibilities, as well as gaps in child care and work-life balance opportunities.

Particular groups of women often face additional barriers. Immigrant women tend to have lower employment rates than Canadian-born women and this is the case even for immigrant women with higher educational attainment. It takes longer for immigrant women than immigrant men to integrate into the workforce, and immigrant women are less likely to be employed in positions that match their education. Recognition of education and skills is a frequent challenge faced by newcomers to Canada.

[Chart 5.2 - Text version]

Reaching higher overall labour force participation rates for women requires an understanding of the different needs of these more vulnerable groups, such as single parents, older women, women with disabilities, immigrant women, women members of visible minorities, LGBTQ2, and Indigenous women.

Women in Canada earn on average 31 per cent less than men on an annual basis. Some of the complex causes of the persistent gender wage gap include a gender-segregated labour market, persistent social norms that place additional care and family responsibilities on women, and the higher representation of women in lower-wage jobs.

Women are overrepresented in part-time , temporary and lower-wage jobs , most of which provide fewer non-wage benefits and limited opportunities for advancement. Even after accounting for differences in hours worked, the median gender wage gap remains at 12 per cent. This gap is also particularly relevant to difficult decisions that many women must make between child care and paid employment. Caring responsibilities —for child-rearing and caring for aging or family members with disabilities—tend to fall to women. According to Statistics Canada’s General Social Survey, women devote 4 hours a day to unpaid work, compared to 3 hours for men in 2015. This can lead to more time off and make women more likely to work shorter hours, which can translate into lower income, which in turn affects parental leave, Employment Insurance benefits, as well as pensions and savings.

[Figure 5.3 - Text version]

Occupational segregation between genders remains a real challenge to economic equality and is a major factor in the gender wage gap. In 2017, women accounted for 23 per cent of workers in natural and applied sciences (which include scientists and engineers), yet represented 80 per cent of the workforce in health occupations. Such segregation reflects a lack of diversified educational paths and is embedded in social norms about traditional gender roles in the workplace. The prevalence of men in highly paid occupations is also due to many other factors, including gender biases in the workplace, and work environments that do not accommodate flexibility for caregiving.

Results to Date

The Multilateral Early Learning and Child Care Framework will increase the availability of affordable day care spaces, allowing more low- and modest-income mothers to enter and remain in the labour market.

Parents can now claim up to 18 months of parental leave.

Workers can also get Employment Insurance when they need to take care of an ill family member.

All federally regulated employees have the right to request flexible work arrangements , a right that particularly helps working parents balance work and family life.

Budget 2018 Actions

Supporting a more equal distribution of child care within the home through a new EI Parental Sharing Benefit.

Committing to move forward with a proactive Pay Equity regime, including new pay transparency requirements in the federally regulated sector.

Helping visible minority newcomer women in Canada get into and staying in the workforce.

Collecting data and undertaking research and policy work associated with the Gender Results Framework.

Leadership and Democratic Participation

More women in senior management positions, and more diversity in senior leadership positions

Proportion of employees in management positions who are women (including intersecting identities), by management level

Increased opportunities for women to start and grow their business, and succeed on a global scale

Proportion of businesses majority-owned by women (including intersecting identities), by business size, including small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)

More company board seats held by women, and more diversity on company boards

Proportion of board members who are women (including intersecting identities), by type of board

Greater representation of women and underrepresented groups in elected office and ministerial positions in national and sub-national governments

Proportion of seats held by women (including intersecting identities) in national Parliament

Proportion of seats held by women (including intersecting identities) in local governments (provincial, territorial, municipal, First Nations Band Councils)

Proportion of ministerial positions held by women (including intersecting identities) in federal-provincial-territorial governments and Chiefs in First Nations communities who are women

Increased representation of women and underrepresented groups in the judicial system

Proportion of federally appointed judges (federal and provincial courts) who are women (including intersecting identities)

Proportion of law enforcement, security and intelligence officers who are women (including intersecting identities), by rank

Why This Matters

A more balanced distribution of men and women at all levels of decision-making is essential to a fair and democratic society. It also leads to better decision-making.

Gender equality and diversity in positions of leadership is associated with better management, increased availability of skilled employees, stronger employee engagement and higher productivity.

Progress and Challenges

While there are more women in decision-making positions today, including entrepreneurs, senior managers and political positions, women continue to face barriers to advancement in leadership roles.

Although progress has been made in women’s entrepreneurship , gender gaps persist. The number of private businesses majority-owned by women in the small and medium sized enterprise landscape has grown in Canada, and women in Canada are more involved in business start-ups than in most other OECD countries. However, women remain underrepresented as business owners, with fewer than one in six small and medium-sized businesses majority-owned by women. Notably, women entrepreneurs are less likely than men entrepreneurs to seek to grow their businesses and are less likely to export.

Canada’s diversity is vastly underrepresented in top corporate positions, including women, Indigenous Peoples, people with disabilities, members of visible minorities and LGBTQ2 individuals. Today, women represent just under one-third of senior managers , with most of the progress over the last 30 years being limited to the public sector. Only one in five company board seats at Financial Post 500 companies is held by a woman, and only one in 20 chief executive officers is a woman. In an effort to bring greater diversity to corporate boards and senior management ranks, the Government introduced Bill C-25, an Act to amend the Canada Business Corporations Act.

Currently there are three men for every one woman among the top 10 per cent of income earners and eight men for every one woman among the top 0.1 per cent of income earners. Increasing the representation of women in corporate leadership positions would have a large impact on the gender wage gap. A study by Nicole M. Fortin, Brian Bell and Michael Boehn has shown that achieving a more balanced distribution of women and men in top jobs could reduce the gender wage gap by almost half.

[Figure 5.4 - Text version]

In political life , women make up less than one-third of elected officials, although important variations exist across jurisdictions. The introduction of Canada’s first gender-balanced Cabinet in 2015 was an important step, but women still make up only one-quarter of Members of Parliament. In this respect, Canada falls short compared with many OECD countries, ranking 16th out of 35 OECD countries in the percentage of women parliamentarians. Moreover, LGBTQ2 women, women members of visible minorities, persons with disabilities and Indigenous women are underrepresented in the House of Commons. At the municipal level, women are most underrepresented as mayors, accounting for only 18 per cent of mayors across Canada, compared with 28 per cent of city councillors (excluding the Territories).

[Chart 5.3 - Text version]

Greater gender balance and diversity in the judicial system allows the system to be more responsive to the differing needs and situations of Canadians. Progress has been made in the number of women working in the judicial system, and gender gaps are narrower. The proportion of women who are judges has increased over time. Today, roughly 39 per cent of superior court judges are women.

Diversification is also key to equity in policing. In terms of law enforcement , particularly in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the number of women recruits has been stable, but there have been increases in the representation of women at various levels of promotion, including Commanding Officers.

Results to Date

Canada introduced its first gender-balanced Cabinet in 2015.

Implemented an open, transparent and merit-based approach to selecting candidates for Governor-in-Council (GIC) positions.

Increased focus and support for women starting and growing their own business —the Business Development Bank of Canada has authorized a total of $912 million in financing to majority women-owned firms since 2015.

Introduced Bill C-25, aimed at increasing diversity on corporate boards and in senior management ranks under the Canada Business Corporations Act.

Budget 2018 Actions

Helping women entrepreneurs grow their businesses with access to financing, talent, networks and expertise, through the new Women Entrepreneurship Strategy.

Supporting the advancement of women in senior positions by publicly recognizing corporations that are committed to promoting women to senior management positions and boards of directors.

Supporting Members of Parliament who have young children by improving work-life balance and providing designated child care spaces.

Enhancing diversity of the judiciary so it better represents Canadian society.

Supporting the women’s movement by increasing funding for the Women’s Program to support more initiatives that build the capacity of equality-seeking organizations, reduce gender inequality in Canada, and promote a fairer and more productive society.

Engaging Canadians on the benefits of gender equality by hosting a national roundtable on GBA+, leading a national conversation on gender equality with young Canadians, and developing a men and boys strategy in recognition of the fact that men and boys are part of the solution to issues of equality.

Gender-Based Violence and Access to Justice

Workplaces are harassment free

Proportion of employees who self-report being harassed in the workplace, by gender

Fewer women are victims of intimate partner violence and sexual assault

Proportion of women and girls aged 15 years and older subjected to physical, sexual or psychological violence by a current or former intimate partner

Proportion of population who self-reported being sexually assaulted, since age 15, by gender

Fewer victims of childhood maltreatment

Proportion of population who self-reported childhood maltreatment (before age 15), by type of maltreatment and by gender

Fewer women killed by an intimate partner

Homicide rate, by relationship to the perpetrator and by gender

Increased police reporting of violent crimes

Proportion of self-reported incidents of violent crime reported to police, past 12 months, by type of crime and by gender

Fewer Indigenous women and girls are victims of violence

Proportion of Indigenous women and girls subjected to physical, sexual or psychological violence, by Indigenous identity

Increased accountability and responsiveness of the Canadian criminal justice system

Proportion of sexual assaults reported to police that are deemed “unfounded”

Why This Matters

Violence can have impacts on a person’s physical, mental, sexual and reproductive health, which can span generations.

Access to and confidence in the criminal justice system is foundational to Canadian society.

Discrimination, harassment and sexual violence in the workplace can have profound negative effects on health and safety, absenteeism and decreasing productivity.

Progress and Challenges

There are important conversations happening in Canada and around the world regarding issues of discrimination, harassment and gender-based violence. Movements like #MeToo and #TimesUp have shed light on situations and behaviours that simply do not belong in our society.

A recent consultation by Employment and Social Development Canada on harassment and sexual violence in the workplace found that nearly one-third of women in Canada have experienced some form of sexual harassment at work. Yet most do not report harassment, often due to fear of retaliation or lack of confidence that reports will be dealt with effectively. Empowering people to tell their stories secure in the knowledge that they will be heard, believed and respected is a necessary step—but real action on the part of employers, governments and other actors is also needed to ensure that the next generation does not face the same challenges.

Gender-based violence can take many forms and includes any act of violence or abuse that can result in physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering.

[Figure 5.5 - Text version]

Data show that some populations are particularly vulnerable to gender-based violence, including Indigenous women, women with a cognitive or mental health-related disability, those living in northern, rural and remote communities, and LGBTQ2 individuals. For example, research by the Native Women’s Association of Canada suggests that approximately 4,000 Indigenous women were murdered or went missing between 1980 and 2012. Furthermore, while Indigenous women make up only 5 per cent of the female population in Canada, they account for 24 per cent of all victims of homicide in 2015.

Childhood maltreatment is a powerful predictor of future victimization. People who are physically and/or sexually abused as children are twice as likely to be victims of gender-based violence later in life. While men are about 1.5 times more likely than women to report having been victims of physical abuse as children, women are three times more likely to have been sexually victimized as children.

Of all sexual assault incidents reported in Canada, nearly half (47 per cent) were committed against women aged 15 to 24, and it is estimated that as many as one in four women experience sexual assault while attending a post-secondary institution. Although most Canadian post-secondary institutions have established policies to prevent and address sexual violence on campus, and some jurisdictions have legislation that makes such policies a requirement, a recent report card issued by “Our Turn”, a national, student-led movement aimed at addressing sexual violence on campuses, gave a score of C or lower to eight of 14 universities surveyed.

Underreporting of gender-based violence to the police remains a serious issue. According to victims of self-reported violence, only 5 per cent of sexual assaults come to the attention of police, a number that is much lower than for other types of violent crime. The belief that reporting a sexual assault will not lead to any charges against the perpetrator, fear about being re-victimized, and the stigma experienced by women who report sexual assault, may increase the likelihood of cases not being reported to the police .

Women are less likely than men to be victims of homicide , but they are more likely to be victims of homicide by intimate partners. New and improved data on intimate partner violence are being developed but, in general, intimate partner violence is consistently identified as the most common form of violence against women, both nationally and internationally. Beyond the long-lasting physical and emotional consequences for the victims, all Canadians are paying a high price for violence against women. Canadians collectively spend $8.4 billion each year to deal with the aftermath of spousal violence, according to Department of Justice Canada estimates.

Results to Date

Launched Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence , which includes undertaking data collection and research in priority areas.

Increased funding for shelters and transition housing for individuals fleeing family violence.

Launched the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women.

Enhanced support for victims of sexual harassment in the workplace.

Updated the Canadian Human Rights Act and Criminal Code to consider gender identity and gender expression a distinguishing feature of a person.

Improved gender balance of professionals in the justice system , including judges, with a view to ensuring that the system is more representative of Canadian society in order to better respond to the needs of Canadians.

Budget 2018 Actions

Addressing and preventing gender-based violence by expanding Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence .

Combatting violence at home and in the workplace by protecting federally regulated employees from harassment and violence in the workplace and providing support to victims of family violence .

Addressing historical wrongs for LGBTQ2 individuals in the federal government.

Enhancing access to the family justice system for Canadian families by expanding the unified family courts system.

Supporting enhanced investigative capacity at the RCMP to address unfounded sexual assault cases .

Establishing a national hotline to combat human trafficking.

Increasing access to legal information and support for Canadian workers who experience sexual harassment in their workplace, and supporting outreach and awareness-raising on this issue.

Engaging stakeholders, including provinces and territories, in developing a harmonized national framework to ensure consistent, comprehensive and sustainable approaches to address gender-based violence at post-secondary institutions across the country.

Poverty Reduction, Health and Well-Being

Fewer vulnerable individuals living in poverty

Prevalence of low income, by economic family type (including single-parent households) and by gender

Fewer women and children living in food-insecure households

Proportion of individuals living in households that are moderately or severely food insecure, by economic family type (including single-parent households) and by gender

Fewer vulnerable individuals lacking stable, safe and permanent housing

Proportion of the population in core housing need, by economic family type (including single-parent households) and by gender

Child and spousal support orders enforced

Collection rate, by type of beneficiary (child, spouse or both)

More years in good health

Leading causes of death (including suicide rate), by gender

Health-adjusted life expectancy at birth, by gender

Proportion of population that participated regularly in sport, by gender

Improved mental health

Proportion of adults who have high psychological well-being, by gender

Improved access to contraception for young people and reduced adolescent birth rate

Proportion of population aged 15-34 that did not use contraception among sexually active population not trying to conceive

Adolescent birth rate (aged 15-19) per 1,000 women in that age group

Why This Matters

Poverty is a challenge faced by men and women alike, but its effects can be different for women and girls, who are more likely to be victims of violence, to live alone and to suffer health problems.

Ensuring all members of our society have a real and fair chance at success is part of the Government’s plan to strengthen and grow the middle class.

Progress and Challenges

Poverty is a complex issue that ranges from being unable to afford basic necessities, such as healthy food and safe and permanent housing, to relative deprivation—being unable to afford things like access to the internet, and swimming lessons for children. Poverty is closely linked to issues of mental and physical health and well-being, which affect many Canadians on a day-to-day basis.

Canada is a prosperous country, but about one in 10 people are living in low-income families. Economic and social marginalization affects certain groups of people disproportionately, including women in particular.

[Chart 5.4 - Text version]

Almost one in three single mothers are raising their children in poverty—negatively affecting their children’s health and outcomes in school, and often having lasting effects across generations. This is particularly true for Indigenous women, who are more likely to be single mothers.

Poverty also affects individuals differently. About 2.7 million Canadians, the majority of whom are women, live in households that have inadequate or insecure access to food. Food insecurity is more prevalent among households with children, particularly those headed by single mothers. Food insecurity leaves a significant mark on children’s well-being and puts them at greater risk of conditions such as asthma and depression.

In 2014, approximately 136,000 individuals used a shelter.

Shelter users are more likely to be men, with 72.4 per cent identifying as male, and 27.3 per cent identifying as female.

Individuals aged 25-49 continue to be the largest group of shelter users, at 52.7 per cent.

20 per cent of homeless individuals are youth aged 13-24.

Approximately 29.5 per cent identify as LGBTQ2.

On homelessness —the most extreme form of poverty—single adult men represent a large portion of this population in Canada. These individuals tend to suffer more from mental illness, addictions and disability. The percentage of women in the homeless emergency shelter population is lower than men, but there is a lack of data on homeless women who are in shelters for survivors fleeing family violence and hidden homelessness. Indigenous Peoples are overrepresented among the homeless population in many urban centres in Canada. LGBTQ2 youth are also at higher risk of homelessness due to homophobia and transphobia in the home.

Poor health can contribute to poverty by preventing people from participating in education, training and work. Canada has enjoyed large gains in life expectancy over the past decades, thanks to improvements in living conditions and public health access, and progress in medical care. Women tend to live longer than men; however, they are less likely to do so in good health. In other words, women tend to suffer more from illness and health problems. Mental illness in particular can have a major impact on income security.

Based on Statistics Canada data, men are about three times more likely than women to die by suicide , but women are three to four times more likely to attempt suicide. LGBTQ2 people, particularly youth and transgender people, face higher rates of depression, anxiety, self-harm and suicidality. Youth suicide is also a pressing issue for Indigenous youth.

Life expectancy tends to be below average for Indigenous Peoples. One study found that residents of Inuit Nunangat are expected to live nine years less than residents in the rest of Canada, reflecting self-inflicted injury, primarily at ages 15 to 24, and respiratory diseases often related to smoking-related diseases.

As teenage pregnancy is related to lower educational attainment, it can negatively affect labour force participation in the long term and in turn lead to poverty. While the adolescent birth rate in Canada has been steadily falling, it is higher than in many other OECD countries (Canada ranks 25th out of 34 countries in terms of births among 15-to-19 year olds).

Results to Date

Nine out of 10 Canadian families are receiving more money under the Canada Child Benefit —particularly beneficial for low-income single mothers.

Increased Guaranteed Income Supplement payments of up to $947 per year are helping nearly 900,000 low-income seniors, 70 per cent of whom are women.

Restored the eligibility age for Old Age Security and Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits to 65, putting thousands of dollars back in the pockets of Canadians as they become seniors.

New National Housing Strategy that will support vulnerable populations—with at least 25 per cent of investments to support projects that target the unique needs of women and girls.

Greater funding to improve the health of First Nations and Inuit , including in services that are women-specific, such as maternal and child health.

Budget 2018 Actions

Improving access to the Canada Child Benefit and other benefits for Indigenous Peoples living on reserves, in the North and in urban areas.

Improving access to and increasing support from the Canada Workers Benefit .

Improving the daily life of Indigenous Peoples with investments in housing , health and safe drinking water

Improving the quality of life of people with dementia and ensuring that caregivers have the support they need.

Moving towards an inclusive sport system by setting a target to achieve gender parity in sport by 2035 and increasing funding to support data and research, innovative practices to promote female participation in sport and provide support to national sports organizations to support the greater inclusion of women and girls in all facets of sport.

Gender Equality Around the World

An international feminist agenda that advances Canada’s commitment to gender equality and women’s empowerment, including:

Increased and meaningful participation of women in peace and security efforts

More women in leadership and decision-making roles, and stronger women’s rights organizations

More women and girls have access to sexual and reproductive health services and their rights are promoted

More of Canada’s trade agreements include gender related provisions

More women have equitable access and control over the resources they need to build their own economic success and the economic success of their communities

Fewer people are victims of sexual and gender-based violence and sexual exploitation, including in conflict settings and online

More girls and women access quality education and skills training

Why This Matters

Canada is committed to eradicating poverty, and building a more peaceful, inclusive and prosperous world. The Government will invest in women’s empowerment and gender equality as the best ways to achieve these objectives, grounded in the Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development.

Numerous studies tell us this is the right course. It has been estimated that achieving gender equality around the world could increase global GDP by $12 trillion over 10 years. And there are strong correlations between gender inequalities and extreme poverty.

For these reasons and more Canada is pursuing a feminist approach across all its international policies and programming, including diplomacy, trade, security, and development.

Progress and Challenges

Over the past three decades, the world has made impressive gains in reducing poverty. Sustained economic growth has led to higher incomes, broader access to goods and services, and a better standard of living for most of the world’s citizens. New technologies, including access to mobile phones and the internet, are generating economic opportunities, access to services, and opening new avenues for advocacy and the protection of human rights.

But not all these developments are universally positive nor has everyone benefitted equally. Millions of people continue to struggle in the face of persistent poverty and inequality, exacerbated by violent conflict and the effects of climate change.

Women and girls—whose voices and interests are too often ignored—are at a particular disadvantage. For instance, women are legally discriminated against in more than 150 countries. In some countries women also face restrictions when it comes to registering a business, inheriting property and owning land . An important part of making sure that women and girls are able to take full advantage of economic opportunities involves giving them control over their own sexual and reproductive health . In many countries, these opportunities and choices are limited by discriminatory laws and policies, inadequate services, and ongoing threats of sexual and gender-based violence and exploitation.

When women and girls are given equal opportunities to succeed, and where their rights are promoted and protected, they can be powerful agents of change—driving stronger economic growth, encouraging greater peace and cooperation, and improving the quality of life for their families and their communities. Increasing gender equality can:

Deliver strong economic growth: Women already generate nearly 40 per cent of the world’s GDP and the potential for further growth led by women is relatively untapped.

Help cut down on extreme poverty: Ensuring that all students—especially girls—leave school with basic literacy skills could cut worldwide levels of extreme poverty by 12 per cent.

Reduce chronic hunger: Providing female farmers with equal access to resources could reduce the number of people living with chronic hunger by as much as 17 per cent.

Benefit entire families: Evidence shows that women tend to spend more of their incomes in ways that directly benefit their children, improving nutrition, health and educational opportunities for the next generation.

Empower all those who face discrimination: Women and girls are not the only groups that face discrimination and inequality. Others face social and/or economic marginalization, including on the basis of their sex, race, ethnicity, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, language, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, ability, or migrant or refugee status. By empowering women and girls as a means to achieve gender equality, the Government sends the clear message that equality is for everyone.

Canada is committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the global effort to eradicate poverty and “leave no one behind”. To this end, Canada has adopted a Feminist International Assistance Policy where it will focus its efforts on 6 action areas—gender equality and empowerment of women and girls, human dignity, growth that works for everyone, environment and climate action, inclusive governance, and peace and security. The Policy supports targeted investments, partnerships, and innovation and advocacy efforts that have with the greatest potential to close gender gaps and improve everyone’s chance of success. By 2021–22, the Policy commits that 95 per cent of bilateral international development assistance will target or integrate gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, and that no less than 50 per cent of Canada's bilateral international development assistance is directed to sub-Saharan African countries by 2021-22.

Canada recognizes the important need to ensure the benefits of trade are shared more broadly with more people. This includes closing the gap in women’s participation in trade and the economy. Canada is pursuing a progressive trade and investment agenda which seeks fair trade opportunities for women-owned and operated SMEs, supports women exporters, and advances trade agreements that incorporate a gender perspective.

Canada is also committed to supporting and maintaining peace and security efforts internationally, which are key to creating a safer and more prosperous world. In fragile and conflict-affected states, human rights can be violated and gender equality efforts negatively affected. Women and girls are particularly at risk in conflict-affected areas. For example, sexual and gender-based violence can become more pervasive in conflict settings. In these contexts, women’s human rights, such as participation in political processes and access to the legal system, are often undermined.

When women are more involved in peace and security efforts, peace processes have been found to be more likely to be successful, and peace agreements more likely to endure. Moreover, women are uniquely able to provide outreach to other women. That is why Canada is focused on increasing the proportion of women deployed overseas and empowering women in all aspects of peace and security, including through support for the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace Operations—a plan to work with the United Nations and interested member states to develop innovative approaches to women’s meaningful participation in peace operations.

This approach is reinforced through Canada’s new defence policy, which will promote diversity and inclusion as core institutional values. New focus will be placed on recruiting and retaining underrepresented populations, including women, within the Canadian Armed Forces, with a target to increase the representation of women to 25 per cent of the overall force within 10 years. This will not only result in a positive cultural change, but also increase overall operational effectiveness.

Results to Date

Launched Canada's Feminist International Assistance Policy , which commits to reducing extreme poverty and building a more peaceful, inclusive and prosperous world. Specific announcements in support of the Policy include: $180 million to the Global Partnership for Education, providing targeted support for girls’ education and help to strengthen education systems in developing countries. $15 million to Marie Stopes Tanzania, to provide girls and women with improved access to the information and family planning services and commodities they require. Launched the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace Operations to develop innovative approaches for women’s meaningful participation in peace operations. $20 million to help create the World Bank-managed Women’s Entrepreneurship Facility.

Unveiled Canada's new defence policy , which commits to demonstrating leadership in reflecting Canadian ideals of diversity, respect and inclusion, including gender equality.

A progressive trade agenda , including an amended Canada–Chile Free Trade Agreement that has a chapter on trade and gender—the first of its kind for a Group of Twenty (G20) country— and a new preamble to the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership that reaffirms the importance of promoting progressive values, including gender equality.

Budget 2018 Actions

Providing $2 billion over five years in new resources to expand programming that will contribute to eradicating poverty and building a more peaceful, inclusive and prosperous world.

Providing new innovative tools to deliver $1.5 billion over five years in international assistance to support Canada’s Feminist International Assistance Policy.

Connecting women entrepreneurs with export opportunities through women-focused international trade missions, tailored advisory services, and access to global value chains by providing $10 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to expand the Business Women in International Trade program.

GBA+ of Budget 2018

Fairness and equality are at the forefront of Budget 2018. Important new investments are supporting equality at home and in the workplace, and providing help to people who need it most, including Indigenous Peoples, people with disabilities and individuals suffering the effects of substance abuse.

This budget also proposes many other investments to help Canadians and grow the economy, which will undoubtedly affect different people in different ways. These include measures to bolster Canada’s research and innovation capacity, help businesses grow and succeed, reinforce the Government’s public safety institutions and enhance services to Canadians.

A true commitment to equality and diversity requires an understanding of how all policy decisions affect different people differently. The Government fully embraced this principle in Budget 2018, where every single decision on expenditure and tax measures was informed by GBA+ .

There are many ways that budget measures can carry differential gender impacts. In some cases, investments are targeted for particular groups. In other cases, measures may unintentionally benefit one group or another disproportionately. For example, the delivery of certain measures may rely on sectors or occupational groups that are male or female predominant. The Government’s analysis of expected impacts will not always get it right. It may be limited by data gaps, or incorrect assumptions about how individuals may react. This is why presenting this information within the budget is so important. It invites scrutiny and encourages an open and frank discussion about the impacts of budget measures and how to promote better outcomes for all Canadians.

Strengthening Support for Low-Income Canadians

Enhancing the Canada Workers Benefit

Increasing uptake of the Canada Child Benefit and other benefits among Indigenous Peoples

Policy Landscape

Low-income Canadians face many challenges that can limit their opportunities to get ahead. The Government of Canada provides a number of benefits to reduce barriers to improved well-being and success for these individuals.

The Canada Child Benefit (CCB) supports about 3.3 million families, and in particular low-income families. Close to 65 per cent of families receiving the maximum CCB amounts are single-parent families, more than 90 per cent of which are led by single mothers. Single mothers who will receive the CCB in the 2018–19 benefit year will receive close to $9,000 annually in benefit payments on average.

Low-income families and individuals also benefit from the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax Credit , which is paid to about 10.5 million recipients each year.

The Canada Workers Benefit (CWB, previously the Working Income Tax Benefit) provides important income support for working Canadians and helps offset financial barriers associated with work, such as taxes, expenses, and the loss of supports such as social assistance. While women make up about half of current claimants, they are overrepresented among single-parent claimants, making up about 90 per cent of that group.

The Refundable Medical Expense Supplement plays a similar role, helping offset the loss of coverage for medical and disability-related expenses when individuals move from social assistance into the paid labour force.

The federal government also supports low-income seniors through the Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS), a non-taxable benefit, which includes a top-up benefit for vulnerable seniors who rely almost exclusively on income from the Old Age Security program. In total, the GIS program benefits nearly two million seniors. Budget 2016 increased the GIS top-up benefit for single seniors by up to $947 annually, helping nearly 900,000 low-income seniors, 70 per cent of whom are women.

[Chart 5.5 - Text version]

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

The Government is investing in initiatives to help increase the uptake of the CCB and other benefits among Indigenous Peoples living on reserves, in the North and in urban areas. The evidence suggests that these actions are needed, as:

Indigenous children under the age of 15 are more likely than non-Indigenous children to be living in a single-parent family (about 34 per cent compared to 17 per cent, based on the 2011 National Household Survey).

Of these children, more than 80 per cent are being cared for by a single mother.

Through broader community engagement with Indigenous communities, in combination with additional investments in the Community Volunteer Income Tax Program and other tax-filing related services, the Government will reach out to families that are facing barriers to accessing these benefits. The significant support provided through the CCB and other benefits will help improve the quality of life of single mothers and other parents living in these communities and ensure that the needs of their children are better met.

Safia is a single parent with one child under the age of six. Safia earns $25,000 and claims $2,500 in child care expense deductions. In 2019, she will receive almost $1,700 from the Canada Workers Benefit—an increase of more than $600 relative to what she would have received from the WITB in 2018. Safia will also receive $6,496 in CCB payments for the 2018–19 benefit year.

Enhancing the Canada Workers Benefit (CWB) and improving access to the benefit will support low-income workers and, in particular, will help support single mothers—a group with relatively low employment rates and an elevated risk of living in poverty. Claimants currently receiving the Working Income Tax Benefit—a precursor to the CWB—are more likely than the general tax filing population to be single parents, representing about 16 per cent of claimants, compared to 7 per cent of tax filing, working-age families.

Helping Working Canadians

A new Employment Insurance Parental Sharing Benefit to support sharing of child care responsibilities in the first years, which is expected to be available starting June 2019.

The Employment Insurance Working While on Claim Benefit to help individuals stay connected to the labour market

Additional skills training support for those who need it most

Policy Landscape

The Government of Canada provides a number of programs and benefits to help working Canadians balance work and family responsibilities, and encourage individuals to enter and stay in the workforce.

The Employment Insurance (EI) program is a critical part of Canada’s labour market supports, providing temporary income support to people who have lost their jobs and helping Canadians who take time off work for specific life events (e.g., child birth, sickness and injury).

Women represented 44 per cent of all new EI claimants in 2015–16, and received 47 per cent of the total amount paid. However, they accounted for almost two-thirds of new EI special benefits claimants and received 83 per cent of the total amount paid in EI special benefits. In addition to maternity benefits, women received the largest share of the total amount paid in EI parental benefits, sickness benefits and compassionate care benefits.

[Chart 5.6 - Text version]

The federal government also invests nearly $2.9 billion annually in transfers to provinces and territories to support skills training and development in order to improve labour market outcomes. Budget 2017 provided an additional $2.7 billion over six years, starting in 2017–18, to boost skills training and employment supports for unemployed and underemployed Canadians.

The indirect nature of these programs—administered by provinces and territories—represents a challenge to measuring how investments ultimately meet the needs of different groups of women and men. Current negotiations between federal, provincial and territorial governments on Labour Market Transfer Agreements provide an opportunity to achieve program goals, while providing additional flexibility to provinces and territories, expanding eligibility and focusing on outcomes.

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

Budget 2018 measures to support working Canadians are intended to fill specific gaps in the workforce, with a particular focus on additional support for underrepresented groups in the workforce.

Employment Insurance Measures

Budget 2018 introduces a new EI Parental Sharing Benefit . The new benefit will be available to eligible two-parent families, including adoptive and same-sex couples. This type of benefit has been proven to encourage a more balanced sharing of child-rearing that goes well beyond the five-week period. Quebec and other jurisdictions that have implemented similar benefits have found that they play a key role in who takes time off to provide caregiving. In 2016, for example, 80 per cent of new fathers in Quebec claimed or intended to claim parental benefits, in part because of leave that was specifically reserved for them. In the rest of Canada, which does not provide specific second parent leave, this same figure is only 12 per cent. The new benefit will also provide greater flexibility—particularly for mothers—to return to work sooner, if they so choose.

The EI Working While on Claim measure will help individuals stay in the workforce and ensure that EI claimants always benefit from accepting available work. In addition, Working While on Claim provisions will be extended to EI maternity and sickness claimants. On the whole, this measure is expected to affect more women than men, since women are more likely to work while on claim, and will also affect seasonal claimants and claimants living in Atlantic Canada or Quebec. Very few mothers work while receiving maternity benefits (about 900 out of 175,000 claims), and this is not expected to change with these measures. However, this will benefit those in low-income households who are facing financial pressures that require them to work. The measure will also support people with longer-term illnesses, chronic illnesses or episodic conditions to gradually return and stay connected to work.

Skills Measures

The Government is taking additional targeted steps as part of its Skills plan to ensure that all Canadians are given the opportunity to succeed in the economy of tomorrow.

The new Pre-Apprenticeship Program will target people who are currently underrepresented in the trades, including women, youth, Indigenous Peoples, newcomers, and people with disabilities to prepare for an apprenticeship. Gender differences in the trades seem to be have proved more durable. In 2015, women made up only 11 per cent of new registrations in Red Seal trades, and tended to be in low-paid trades. Furthermore, only 2 per cent of 15-year-old female students in a 2012 survey were planning to pursue a trades career. In addition to attitudinal barriers, women can face other challenges such as an absence of mentors, difficulty finding an employer sponsor, discrimination and family obligations. Barriers can be heightened for women or men who have a disability or who are Indigenous, youth or newcomers.

As a result of this gender-based analysis, Budget 2018 is encouraging women’s increased representation in male-dominated—and better paid—Red Seal trades, by introducing the Apprenticeship Incentive Grant for Women , a five-year pilot project where women in male-dominated Red Seal trades would receive a new grant of $3,000 for each of their first two years of training. This, in combination with the existing Apprenticeship Completion Grant, valued at $2,000, will result in a combined $8,000 in support over the course of their training. This doubles the existing financial support, from $4,000 to $8,000.

The Canada Summer Jobs program has been shown to enable participants to save about one-third of their educational expenses for the following school year, while providing essential skills needed for the future. The current program design accounts for student unemployment in local labour markets, a focus on skills that are most needed, and greater labour market participation of underrepresented groups. These program design features support enhanced participation of women and newcomer youth in STEM fields, and employment opportunities for youth in low-income neighborhoods. In addition, according to the program’s 2016 self-reporting survey results, Indigenous youth represented 5.9 per cent of program participants in summer 2016.

Supporting the Next Generation of Research and Researchers

New granting council investments with requirements to achieve gender equality objectives

New funding for the Canada Research Chairs program to better support early-career researchers and increase diversity

A strategic plan to grow the capacity of Indigenous communities to conduct research and partner with the broader research community

Policy Landscape

The gender impacts of investments in research are not straightforward. A key rationale for government support for research is the “spillover” benefits to society that can result from the research findings. While these benefits are difficult to predict in advance and can involve long lags, they may be seen to represent knowledge and innovations that benefit all Canadians. However, significant gender disparities exist within the research community at Canadian universities and research hospitals that tend to be the direct beneficiaries of research grants.

As women’s participation in higher education continues to grow, there has been a commensurate increase in the number of women university faculty members, but gender gaps remain. Because fewer women than men continue their studies at progressively higher levels of education in many fields of study, women are underrepresented in the pool of researchers eligible to apply for research grants. For example, in humanities studies women make up 64 per cent of bachelor’s degree holders, but only 41 per cent of doctorate holders.

Gender gaps widen when looking at STEM fields, where women make up only one-fifth of individuals with a doctorate in these disciplines. Female representation in certain STEM fields—specifically in mathematics, computer science and engineering—is particularly low.

[Figure 5.6 - Text version]

The Government has also heard from the Fundamental Science Review Panel and many others in the research community that early-career researchers are facing challenges, such as insufficient funding opportunities. Supporting early-career researchers has important consequences for equity and diversity. For example, women, members of visible minorities and Indigenous Peoples are better represented at earlier stages of educational and academic attainment.

[Figure 5.7 - Text version]

Data on university faculty members who are members of visible minorities and Indigenous Peoples are outdated (from 2006). In addition, the 2016 Census did not collect information on people with disabilities, so limited information is available. However, the limited data that are available suggest that people with disabilities are also underrepresented in academia. The 2012 Canadian Survey on Disability found that 14 per cent of Canadians aged 15 and older reported having a disability, while about 10 per cent of doctorate holders reported having a disability, and only one to 2 per cent of Canada Research Chair holders reported having a disability.

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

In Budget 2018, the Government is proposing actions that will make Canada’s research environment more responsive, agile and modern. This includes historic investments in support of researchers and for equipment, combined with improved coordination and harmonization to focus on the highest priorities.

On the whole, the Government does not expect these investments to result in significant immediate changes to the disparities that exist, but consistent with the gender-based analysis, targeted actions are designed to encourage a more inclusive research community and support broader change in the future.

Funding support through the federal granting councils is determined through a merit-based peer review process based on research excellence. In general, the proportion of women who receive granting council awards is approximately equal to the proportion of women applying for them. In some research fields, women are significantly underrepresented, meaning there are fewer female applicants and therefore fewer female awardees. For example, about 80 per cent of applicants and awardees for the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council’s Discovery Grants program are men. Similarly, various Canadian Institutes of Health Research grants programs average over two-thirds male applicants and awardees. Given that these two granting councils award the majority of federal research grants, new funding will disproportionately go to male researchers as a result.

The Government has already begun to implement measures to improve equity, diversity and inclusion, with the recently established Canada Research Coordinating Committee tasked with strengthening equity and diversity in research.

In Budget 2018, the Government is going further to advance these principles, supported by the integration of GBA+ in program design.

The collection of better data on underrepresented groups will inform action plans to promote stronger representation of underrepresented groups in granting council programs, with clear targets and annual reporting to measure progress.

Research institutions will receive support to advance equality and diversity through the adoption of the Athena SWAN (Scientific Women’s Academic Network) program. The program’s goals include structural and cultural changes, such as increased support for women’s careers and efforts to challenge discrimination and bias.

Research institutions will be able to compete for grants to tackle challenges in addressing underrepresentation and career advancement faced by women, Indigenous Peoples, members of visible minorities, people with disabilities and LGBTQ2 individuals.

Indigenous communities will be engaged to identify strategies to grow their capacity to conduct research, partner with the broader research community and assist in establishing a national research program.

In addition, in 2018–19, the granting councils will be required to publish an annual report for Canadians on progress in addressing challenges in the research system, including equity and diversity, and support for researchers at various career stages.

Innovation and Skills Plan—A More Client-Focused Federal Partner for Business

Simpler and stronger support for companies to innovate, scale up and reach global markets

A modern approach to intellectual property

A new Women Entrepreneurship Strategy

Policy Landscape

The suite of federal business innovation programs is fundamentally about breaking down barriers to the success of entrepreneurs and their companies so that they can continue to grow and innovate for the greater benefit of the economy and society. However, to be truly effective, these programs must recognize that these barriers are different for different people.

[Figure 5.8 - Text version]

Today, women remain underrepresented in the Canadian economy, especially among small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)—women are the majority owners of only 16 per cent of all SMEs in Canada. What’s more, women-owned SMEs tend to face poorer prospects, and tend to be smaller, less likely to scale into large companies, and less likely to export. Women-owned companies are especially underrepresented in the technology sector. A recent study estimated that only 13 per cent of Canadian technology companies have at least one woman on the team of founders.

Ensuring that women and women-owned companies have access to this range of support and opportunities is essential to meeting the outcome of a more diverse innovation economy. This includes support throughout the entire growth cycle of a company, from developing new intellectual property to accessing the needed resources and capital for scaling and to finding sales opportunities whether from governments or private companies, including internationally. In addition, well-designed and efficient regulations ensure a level playing field while also minimizing potential barriers to businesses’ success.

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

The Government is taking a comprehensive approach to better support the growth of firms in Canada by consolidating and streamlining programs, modernizing regulations and improving trade opportunities.

These actions will serve the entrepreneurs and companies of today, where important disparities continue to exist from a gender perspective. The Government recognizes that change takes time, but equally recognizes its role in effecting this change by better tailoring its programs and services to the needs of Canadians.

The results of GBA+ have informed the Government’s business innovation reforms. A clear result is the new Women Entrepreneurship Strategy —a comprehensive effort to break down the barriers to growth-oriented entrepreneurship that will include new direct funding from the regional development agencies targeted to women entrepreneurs, mentorship and skills training, as well as targets for federal procurement from women-led business. A strong example of GBA+ at work is the Business Development Bank of Canada’s (BDC’s) accessibility review. The BDC conducted the review to examine how accessible its products and services were to women entrepreneurs. The review motivated a number of new actions by the BDC, including a commitment to make available $1.4 billion in financing to women entrepreneurs, as well as service improvements and a renewed focus on training staff on unconscious biases.

More generally, the Government’s coming reform to federal innovation programs will include a universal goal to improve the participation of underrepresented groups, including women entrepreneurs, in the innovation economy. If women entrepreneurs are to become greater participants in the innovation economy, it is crucial that they have fair access to the entire suite of business innovation programming and that potential biases of program administrators are addressed.

Regional development agencies have extensive experience in helping female entrepreneurs access the tools needed to establish and expand their businesses. The strategy will build on these existing relationships and networks to help women identify and act on new innovation-driven opportunities.

The Federal Economic Development Agency of Southern Ontario supports Communitech’s Fierce Founders Accelerator program, a seed funding program designed to support women-led early-stage businesses. In 2016–17, the Government announced support of $880,000 over two years to Fierce Founders Accelerator to support 20 women-led technology companies.

Through its commitment to enhance export supports for businesses, the Government is also looking to reduce the barriers around access to external markets for certain groups of people, in particular women entrepreneurs. This includes investing $10 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to expand the Trade Commissioner Service’s Business Women in International Trade program, to better connect businesses owned by women with international market opportunities. The Government is also making available $250 million through Export Development Canada to provide financing and insurance solutions to women-owned and women-led businesses that are exporting or looking to begin exporting.

To grow their companies, women entrepreneurs must be able to turn their ideas into competitive goods and services that gain market share. Budget 2018 announces the details of a new Intellectual Property Strategy to ensure a strong foundation for commercial success in an innovation economy. This will include targeted initiatives to support underrepresented groups, such as women and Indigenous entrepreneurs. For example, the Canadian Intellectual Property Office will increase its education and awareness initiatives that are delivered in partnership with business, intermediaries and academia to ensure that Canadians better understand and exploit intellectual property, and integrate it into business strategies. As a result of gender-based analysis, this will also include targeted initiatives to support women and other underrepresented groups.

Advancing Reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples

Ensuring that Indigenous children are safe and supported within their communities

Achieving better results for Indigenous Peoples through investments in health, housing and clean and safe drinking water on reserve

Supporting the recognition and implementation of rights, self-determination and helping Indigenous Nations reconstitute

Policy Landscape

The historical relationship between Indigenous Peoples and the Crown has had a profound impact on Indigenous women. Colonial and paternalistic laws like the Indian Act , as well as other legislation and policies such as residential schools, entrenched policies and imposed structures that caused great harm to pre-existing social structures for Indigenous women.

As a result of this shared history, socio-economic gaps between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Canadians continue to be significant.

[Figure 5.9 - Text version]

Indigenous women are particularly vulnerable, as they continue to be less likely to be part of the paid workforce, have fewer post-secondary qualifications and worse health outcomes than non-Indigenous women.

Since governments use different data methodologies, the Government does not have a nationally consistent view on the number and experiences of Indigenous children in care. However, it is obvious that Indigenous children are significantly overrepresented in the child welfare system. Poverty, inadequate housing and caregivers’ experiences within the child welfare system are some of the main reasons Indigenous children are taken into care. Indigenous women are more likely than their non-Indigenous counterparts to be categorized as ‘at-risk’, to be investigated for alleged neglect and maltreatment, and to have their children removed. Although a similar number of Indigenous boys and girls are taken into institutional care, girls are much more likely to experience sexual abuse. In fact, Indigenous girls are four times more likely than non-Indigenous girls to be victims of sexual violence while in foster care.

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

By continuing to invest directly in the health and well-being of Indigenous Peoples—in particular, Indigenous women and children—while simultaneously supporting Indigenous self-determination and capacity-building, the Government can continue to make progress on addressing the significant disparities between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people.

Greater supports for the First Nations Child and Family Services Program are needed to address the funding pressures facing child and family service agencies, while also increasing prevention resources for communities so that children are safe and families can stay together. Through prevention efforts, girls and boys may become less likely to experience forms of child maltreatment (e.g. neglect, physical abuse, emotional maltreatment), and girls may become less likely to experience sexual abuse.

The new Indigenous Skills and Employment Training Program will support more First Nations, Inuit and Métis women and men entering the workforce by providing essential and vocational skills training they need for lasting employment. To address the unique needs of First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation women and men, distinctions-based programming will be provided with dedicated funding and labour market strategies for First Nations, Inuit, Métis and urban/non-affiliated Indigenous Peoples. As a result of gender-based analysis, wrap-around services, such as child care, will also ensure that Indigenous women can better access skills development and training opportunities offered by the program’s service delivery organizations.

The health needs and experiences of First Nations, Inuit and Métis men, women and children are unique, and there is limited disaggregated health information to help understand these differences. For instance, in the area of mental health and addictions, First Nations and Inuit men may benefit from land-based programs. Women may experience difficulty finding the time to attend regular treatment due to family responsibilities, or may delay seeking help for fear of losing custody of their children. Investments in Indigenous Health will support the collection of Inuit and Métis-specific health data to close information gaps. Increased access to addictions treatment and mental health programs within First Nations communities will support women and men so they do not have to leave their communities to access the resources and tools they need to heal and recover. The Government is making progress in devolving health service delivery to Indigenous communities so that, in the future, health programs are designed, delivered, managed and controlled by Indigenous People for Indigenous People.

Lack of adequate and affordable housing can affect health and well-being. In 2011, 27 per cent of Indigenous women lived in core housing need compared to 13 per cent of Indigenous men. Inadequate housing is also one of the main reasons Indigenous children are taken into foster care at much higher rates than non-Indigenous children. Investments in distinctions-based housing strategies will ensure that Indigenous Peoples have greater control over housing to address the distinct needs of each community and the underlying social determinants of poverty that often contribute to Indigenous children being taken from their families, communities and culture.

The First Nations Land Management Regime empowers First Nations to exercise their jurisdiction by opting out of antiquated Indian Act provisions related to land management and replacing them with their own laws. Wider adoption of the First Nations Land Management Regime will allow more First Nations to exercise their inherent right to self-determination by creating their own laws related to land management, while creating economic opportunities for First Nations through self-management of reserve lands, environmental protection and natural resources. Since communities participating in the First Nations Land Management Regime are required to either implement federal matrimonial real property law provisions or develop their own, expanding the First Nations Land Management Regime will provide legal protection from family violence to more women and children living on reserve. Given that Indigenous women tend to be less likely to hold a certificate of possession of the family home and more likely to experience high rates of domestic violence, the matrimonial real property protections will benefit Indigenous women and children living on reserve.

A Clean Environment for Future Generations

Protecting Canada’s Nature, Parks and Wild Spaces

Pricing carbon pollution and supporting clean growth

Policy Landscape

All Canadians benefit from a clean environment that supports clean air, water and land. Some of the main environmental challenges faced in Canada today relate to climate change, air pollution, water quality and biodiversity.

Canada’s plants and animals, and the environments in which they live, make up ecosystems that provide services all Canadians depend on for our well-being. Healthy ecosystems help filter our air and water, and biodiversity helps ensure that ecosystems can continue to function well.

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

The Government is working with Indigenous Peoples to conserve species and ecosystems, protect the environment from degradation and pollution, improve access to nutritious food and address the challenges Indigenous communities face in accessing safe drinking water.

In Budget 2018, the Government is taking important steps to create a healthy environment for future generations, protect Canada’s natural legacy, address climate change and grow the economy by pricing carbon pollution.

Actions taken to protect Canada’s nature, parks and wild spaces will support Canada’s biodiversity goals and help conserve natural ecosystems. These investments are expected to benefit all Canadians, with some benefitting more than others. For instance, the 2012 Canadian Nature Survey found that a slightly higher percentage of women (51.3 per cent) than men (48.7 per cent) participate in nature-based recreation, education and leisure in Canada.

Indigenous Peoples, especially those living in northern and remote communities, are much more likely than other Canadians to rely directly on the land and water for their subsistence. The 2012 Canadian Nature Survey found that 20.1 per cent of adult Indigenous Peoples participated in hunting or trapping in comparison to 7.2 per cent of the non-Indigenous adult population, and that 38.1 per cent of adult Indigenous Peoples participated in fishing in comparison to 19.3 per cent of the non-Indigenous adult population. Indigenous Peoples also represent the socio-cultural group most directly affected by biodiversity loss and negative changes to their environment, as the quality of the natural environment is also more likely to be an important part of their tradition and identity. The 2012 Canadian Nature Survey found that 38.6 per cent of adult Indigenous Peoples participated in nature conservation activities in comparison to 21.6 per cent of the non-Indigenous adult population.

Vulnerability to emergencies and natural disasters

Anticipated impacts of the increasing concentration of greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere include a higher frequency and severity of extreme weather events.

Research undertaken in 2007 by the Canadian Red Cross, Brandon University and federal partners analyzed the needs of at-risk populations in relation to emergency management at the federal, provincial and territorial levels.

10 population groups were found to be particularly susceptible to harm due to emergencies or disasters: seniors; persons with disability; Indigenous Peoples; medically dependent persons; low-income persons; children and youth; persons with low literacy levels; women; transient populations; and new immigrants and cultural minorities.

The research highlighted that the groups mentioned above are not mutually exclusive categories, and that together they constitute a majority group.

The Government is also taking action to put a price on carbon pollution to address climate change. The impacts of climate change affect Canadians living in every region of the country. Higher temperatures, declining sea and lake ice, increases in extreme weather events and coastal erosion are some of the changes being observed. Canadians living in the North are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, as the impacts are more extreme and occurring at a faster rate there. Research also indicates that natural disaster risks are not evenly distributed across Canadian society, but disproportionately affect some groups, including women, children and Indigenous Peoples.

Supporting the Health and Well Being of Canadians

Addressing the opioid crisis

Federal Tobacco Control Strategy

Public education for cannabis

Supporting people living with dementia and their caregivers

Supporting Canadian families affected by autism spectrum disorder

Policy Landscape

Canada presently faces several public health challenges, including problematic substance use disorder, which is of particular concern. Understanding how these challenges affect different people differently is critical to designing effective policy solutions.

Opioid Use in Canada

A number of sub-populations are being affected by the opioid crisis, including men, women, different socio-economic groups, and First Nations and Inuit populations. However, it is notable that data specific to the Canadian context for many of these populations are lacking, including Indigenous Peoples, LGBTQ, and different socio-economic groups. According to national data released by the Public Health Agency of Canada in September 2017 on behalf of provinces and territories, most apparent opioid-related deaths occurred among men (73 per cent), with some variation across provinces and territories.

[Chart 5.7 - Text version]

Data released by the First Nations Health Authority in August 2017 indicated an almost even gender ratio (52 per cent male / 48 per cent female) in First Nations populations across all of British Columbia for overdose event rates. Women are more likely than men to develop an opioid use disorder related to prescription opioids. This may be because women are more likely than men to seek medical assistance for a medical issue and are thus more likely to be prescribed an opioid pain medication.

Illegal drug use, in particular injection drug use, presents a range of risks, a number of which disproportionately affect women. A 2002 study of people who inject drugs in the Vancouver area found that younger people who inject drugs were more likely to be female and more likely to work in the sex trade. Injection drug use combined with involvement in sex trafficking presents a host of risks, such as HIV infection and sexual abuse.

[Figure 5.10 - Text version]

Tobacco Use in Canada

[Figure 5.11 - Text version]

Surveillance data indicate that, although tobacco use has declined in Canada, gaps based on gender and other intersecting identity factors still exist. Male workers (aged 18-75) in blue-collar occupations such as construction, mining, oil and gas extraction, and transportation and warehousing reported a prevalence of smoking that was 2.4 times the prevalence of workers in white-collar occupations, such as finance, administration and education, or a rate of 30.6 per cent compared to 12.6 per cent.

Data from the 2012 Aboriginal Peoples Survey indicate that 54.1 per cent of Canada’s Inuit population aged 19 years and older smoke daily. Studies have also shown elevated smoking rates among various LGBTQ2 communities in Canada, with estimates ranging between 24 per cent and 45 per cent across different sexual orientation and gender identity groups.

Cannabis Use in Canada

In 2015, Statistics Canada collected data on cannabis use and found that approximately 13 million Canadians over the age of 15 reported using cannabis or hashish at least once in their lifetime. This included 7.5 million men and 5.5 million women. While the proportion of men who used cannabis in the last year has not changed significantly since 2013, the proportion of women who used cannabis in the last year increased from 7 per cent in 2013 to 10 per cent in 2015.

The use of cannabis was found to be more prevalent among youth (aged 15 to 19) and young adults (aged 20 to 24) than among adults aged 25 years and older. The median age of initiating cannabis use was 17 years old for men and women.

People Living With Dementia and Their Caregivers

In 2013–14, 402,000 Canadians aged 65 years and older were living with some form of dementia, including Alzheimer’s disease. Of those diagnosed with dementia, two-thirds are women. In addition to the social costs and effects on families and loved ones, dementia also has significant economic impacts. According to the National Population Health Study of Neurological Conditions published by the Public Health Agency of Canada, the combined health care system costs and out-of-pocket caregiver costs for people with dementia amounted to $10.4 billion in 2016. By 2031, this figure is expected to increase by 60 per cent, to $16.6 billion.

Canadian Families Affected by Autism Spectrum Disorder

Autism spectrum disorder is a complex, lifelong neurodevelopmental disorder that has serious health, social and financial consequences for Canadian families. The estimated prevalence of autism spectrum disorder in Canada is approximately 1 in 94 children aged 5 to 17 years. Studies concur that boys are almost five times more likely than girls to be diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. Canadians affected by autism spectrum disorder regularly face systemic barriers in their pursuit of reliable information, care and resources. Due to the varied nature of how the condition presents in different people, there are no clear best practices for managing the condition that apply to all sufferers equally.

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

In Budget 2018, the Government is committed to finding evidence-based and effective solutions to these public health challenges, recognizing that there is no single option that is appropriate for everyone affected.

While the opioid funding will target all Canadians affected by the opioid crisis, certain sub-populations will be particularly targeted for increased access to treatment services, including First Nations and Inuit, offenders in the criminal justice system, people living with addiction and substance abuse disorder, and other vulnerable groups to be identified through increased surveillance activities. Public awareness campaigns and messaging will be gender-sensitive and inclusive of gender-diverse groups, tailored to target Canadian women, men, girls, boys and gender-diverse individuals. In addition, investments supporting data improvements will help us better understand the populations being affected and target particular groups with prevention and treatment programs.

Government efforts on tobacco control will continue to support cessation, harm reduction and prevention for tobacco users in the general Canadian population. In addition, target populations will include young adults working in trades and semi-skilled occupations, Indigenous people, the LGBTQ2 community, and other communities demonstrating high rates of tobacco use. Targeted groups may also include people with lower socio-economic status and people with mental health issues. Under the modernized Federal Tobacco Control strategy, public awareness and targeted programming will take sex and gender inequities under consideration and will undertake targeted efforts, such as specific gender-sensitive health promotions for men to reduce their tobacco use.

Public education for cannabis will benefit all Canadians as the Government works to legalize and strictly regulate and restrict cannabis in order to keep it out of the hands of Canadian youth and keep profits away from criminals and organized crime. Budget 2018’s proposed investments in the Mental Health Commission of Canada and the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction will help us better understand what cannabis use looks like in Canada. Funding for the Substance Use and Addictions Program will support organizations that are best placed to communicate with their communities. Priorities for the Substance Use and Addictions Program have always included populations with a higher risk associated with cannabis use, such as those who initiate use early (youth), those who use frequently, those who use before driving, those who use during pregnancy, and seniors.

To support people living with dementia and their caregivers, investments are proposed to support community-based projects that provide mental health supports and information about self-care for family caregivers, tools to help locate resources quickly, including information about best practices for providing care for people living with dementia, and tools to combat stigma associated with dementia. This will disproportionately benefit the women who are diagnosed with dementia, as well as their caregivers.

Support for activities that improve access to information and to research evidence on best practices and treatments for people living with autism is expected to positively affect those diagnosed with the disorder and their families and caregivers. This investment will also allow for the exploration of new and innovative ways to improve the quality of life of individuals and families affected by autism as well as their caregivers who are likely disproportionately women.

Ensuring Security and Prosperity

Introducing Canada’s National Cyber Security Strategy

Supporting Royal Canadian Mounted Police and Canada Border Services Agency front-line operations

Establishing a national hotline to help combat human trafficking

Addressing “unfounded” sexual assault cases

Investing in research to address post-traumatic stress injuries for public safety officers

Improving mental health supports for inmates

Policy Landscape

“... to all the women who have been impacted by the Force’s failure to have protected your experience at work, and on behalf of every leader, supervisor or manager, every Commissioner: I stand humbly before you today and solemnly offer our sincere apology.”

Former RCMP Commissioner Bob Paulson’s formal apology to female officers and civilian members, Oct 6, 2016

The recent RCMP gender harassment and discrimination class action lawsuit serves as an important reminder of the work ahead to ensure that Canada’s public safety institutions build and nurture cultures that are diverse, respectful and inclusive.

Investments in the public safety sector reflect a number of considerations, one of which is to ensure that all Canadians live in safe communities that are free of violence. Another is to promote diversity within Canada’s public safety institutions so that they reflect the communities they serve. The physical and mental health needs of the people who work to keep us safe every day is another consideration.

A diverse workforce fosters cultural change within organizations, reducing the prevalence and tolerance of harassment and discrimination in the workplace and enabling institutions to develop better tools to interact with Canadians in what are often difficult circumstances.

The public safety sector has been and remains a heavily gendered field. Law enforcement has typically been male-dominated and recent reports have called attention to gendered institutional cultures where discrimination and harassment persist in workplaces such as the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. In 2016, 21.6 per cent of all Regular Members in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police were women; across Canada, women accounted for 21.1 per cent of all police officers across various forces.

Emerging areas of law enforcement, such as cybercrime, are also gendered as they typically rely on technical specialists from male-dominated fields in science and engineering. A 2017 study of cyber security professionals found that women are globally underrepresented among this group at 11 per cent—much lower than the representation of women in the overall global workforce.

Challenges also exist in ensuring that public safety institutions have the tools and expertise needed to respond to vulnerable populations—whether they are at the border, in cities or in rural areas.

Among those vulnerable populations are victims of human trafficking, the vast majority (93 per cent) of whom are women and girls. In fact, one quarter of female victims of human trafficking are under the age of 18, according to 2014 data from Statistics Canada. In addition to women and girls, youth, Indigenous Peoples, and individuals who identify with the LGBTQ2 community are most likely to be victims of human trafficking.

Women are also most likely to be victims of sexual assault. In 2014 alone, an estimated 635,000 incidents of sexual assault occurred. Women were victims in 87 per cent of these incidents, and 90 per cent were not reported to police. Of reported incidents, too many cases are inaccurately deemed as unfounded. There is an important opportunity to make changes in this regard.

Finally, in recent years, there have been increasing calls to address the mental health burden associated with work in the public safety sector. The people who put their lives on the line to protect Canadians sometimes need additional mental health supports for their own well-being. A 2017 report on mental health of public safety officers in Canada shows that female municipal and provincial police officers and firefighters are more likely than their male counterparts to report mental health issues. However, a lack of information persists regarding the full extent to which post-traumatic stress injuries affects public safety officers, and more research is needed in this important area, including the need to reduce stigma, and better understand the potential impacts on different groups of men and women.

[Chart 5.8 - Text version]

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

Through Budget 2018, the Government proposes to take action to ensure that principles of equity, diversity and inclusion underpin the operations and outcomes of all activities in the areas of safety and security. The investments highlight the importance of increasing the representation of women and other underrepresented groups in fields such as law enforcement, security and intelligence. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police, the Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the Communications Security Establishment have each made it a priority to increase diversity and inclusion through recruitment , demonstrating a commitment to building respectful workplaces with equal opportunities for women in hiring, promotion and retention.

The Government is committed to combatting gender-based violence, and proposes to establish a National Human Trafficking Hotline . The new hotline will help protect vulnerable individuals, the majority of whom are women and girls, from being trafficked and enable victims to access the necessary social and law enforcement services they need.

In addition, the Government proposes to support the RCMP in continuing and expanding its review of unfounded sexual assault cases. Investments in this area will help provide accountability across the RCMP for investigations, and support the development of curriculum and training to address the problems raised by “unfounded”. An external advisory committee and better supports for victims will also form part of this initiative. This investment will support the Government’s commitment to ensuring that survivors of sexual assault and gender-based violence are treated with the utmost dignity and respect, including throughout the course of police investigations.

Finally, Budget 2018 proposes support for the most vulnerable in the federal correctional system. Expanding mental health care supports for inmates, including targeted supports for women inmates, will help respond to the increasingly complex mental health care needs of women in federal correctional facilities. The Government also proposes funding through Budget 2018 to expand the Office of the Correctional Investigator’s capacity to investigate issues—including related to women and Indigenous offenders.

Access to Justice

Increasing judicial resources for superior courts

Expanding Unified Family Courts

Providing legal aid funding to support victims of workplace sexual harassment

Protecting federally regulated employees from harassment and violence in the workplace

Increasing access to legal information and services in both official languages

Policy Landscape

Confidence in and respect for our justice system is one of the pillars of Canada’s democracy. Canadians are entitled to have access to a justice system that is fair and efficient, and a judiciary that is representative of and responsive to the diverse fabric of our country.

Many Canadians will come into contact with the justice system at some point in their lives—whether seeking legal information or advice, working as a legal professional or being party to a legal matter. Depending on the level of engagement, individuals will be affected differently by the justice system when gender, age, culture, ethnicity and racialization are taken into account.

For example, Indigenous Peoples are overrepresented in the criminal justice system and are more than twice as likely as non-Indigenous Peoples to experience violent victimization. The majority of people who appear before the courts on criminal matters are younger Canadians (aged 18-34) and, in general, men are more likely than women to be involved in the criminal justice system—though the number of women is increasing. However, women are more likely to be victims of specific types of offences, such as sexual harassment, sexual assault and intimate partner violence. People with disabilities and members of visible minorities are more likely to experience harassment than other groups.

Canadians’ confidence in our courts could be enhanced if the judiciary more closely mirrors the reality and experiences of those who appear before it. This includes addressing the relatively low representation of women, racialized groups, Indigenous Peoples and persons of other diverse backgrounds on the bench.

The majority of judges (56 per cent) appointed under this Government have been women. Today, women account for roughly 39 per cent of judges on the superior court bench. This is up from 35 per cent in 2015. The Government knows that more can be done to ensure Canada’s judges reflect our diverse society.

That is why in 2016 the Government introduced a new selection process for superior court judges. The new process is meant to increase the transparency and accountability of the selection process to identify outstanding judicial candidates who reflect Canada’s diversity and a gender balance.

Similarly, the Government recognizes that some people—such as Indigenous Peoples—may not have confidence in the judicial system because of the current jury selection processes. That is why the Government intends to bring forward broad-based, concrete reforms to the criminal justice system, including changes to how juries are selected.

[Figure 5.12 - Text version]

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

Access to justice will have different meanings and implications for every Canadian. This Government proposes to invest in programs and initiatives that will improve access to justice—for all Canadians—now and into the future. Improved access to justice can take the form of faster conclusions to legal proceedings for Canadians who appear before the courts, new legal aid support for victims of harassment in the workplace, and assurances that Canadians’ legal rights are upheld by the judicial system.

The new judicial positions supported through Budget 2018 offer an opportunity to further enhance diversity within the superior courts, to ensure that these judges reflect the makeup of Canada’s population. These judges will be selected through the new superior court judicial appointments process, introduced by the Government in 2016.

Additionally, more Canadian families that are experiencing issues including separation, divorce, support and custody disputes will receive support through an expanded Unified Family Courts system. Unified Family Courts consider family law issues under one court system, rather than two, and help make the process more streamlined and user-friendly. Enhancing access to specialized courts that are sensitive to family law matters will benefit all Canadians who rely on these services, including women who are the majority of family support recipients.

In addition, through Budget 2018 investments, Canadians can expect:

Greater efficiencies in the Federal Court system resulting from ongoing investments in judicial and registry services .

Access to more legal information and services in the official language of their choice.

In November, the Government introduced Bill C-65to create a single, integrated framework that will protect federally regulated employees from harassment and violence in the workplace . The proposed initiatives are expected to have a greater benefit for women in federal jurisdiction workplaces, including those in senior management roles, due to their greater exposure to harassment and sexual violence compared to their male counterparts. This is supported by a 2014 Angus Reid Institute survey that found that Canadian women are more than three times more likely than men to say that they have experienced sexual harassment in the workplace (43 per cent versus 12 per cent). In addition, research has identified several demographic groups with elevated risks of violent victimization, including sexual minorities (LGBTQ2), Indigenous Peoples, people with disabilities (especially those with mental or learning disabilities), and workers living in the Canadian territories.

To further support Canadians who have experienced workplace sexual harassment, the Government is proposing to boost legal aid funding across the country with a focus on supporting victims of sexual harassment in the workplace. In addition, a pan-Canadian outreach program will be undertaken to better inform workers, particularly those most vulnerable, about their rights and how they can access services in the event of experiencing harassment.

The Government will also provide up to $5.5 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to the Status of Women Canada, to work with stakeholders, including provinces and territories towards developing a harmonized national framework to ensure consistent, comprehensive, and sustainable approaches in addressing gender based violence at post-secondary institutions across the country.

Starting in 2019, for those universities and college campuses that are not implementing best practices addressing sexual assaults on campus, the Government of Canada will consider withdrawing federal funding.

Improving Service Delivery

Improving client services at the Canada Revenue Agency

Strengthening the IT function in government

Employment Insurance call centres

Improving data to support shared growth and gender equality

Policy Landscape

The federal government provides a wide array of programs and services to Canadians from coast to coast to coast. For these services to be timely and useful, they must be accessible and available to all Canadians, while tailored to meet the needs of different groups.

For many Canadians, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) is the only source of direct contact with the government. Effective and accessible CRA telephone and digital services are critical to meeting the diverse needs of Canadians. Furthermore, the complexity of the tax system, low literacy and lack of access to available assistance are all barriers to tax filing among low-income individuals that can cause them to miss out on potential tax benefits. Indeed, according to a 2016 Prosper Canada survey of over 300 tax practitioners and experts, insufficient access to clinics and services and the high cost of commercial tax help were the most commonly cited barriers to tax filing among low income Canadians.

Employment Insurance (EI) call centres also play a key role in delivering EI benefits, allowing Canadians to obtain information and assistance from agents who know the EI program. But demand is high: in 2016–17, there were approximately 6.2 million EI-related calls to Service Canada. In this context, effective service delivery is critical to ensuring that Canadians can access their benefits when they need them most, without the added stress of processing or accessibility problems.

As a major Canadian employer, the Government can be a key contributor to change through the organizational culture that it nurtures. As the Government strives to ensure the security of Canadians’ personal information by adapting to emerging technologies and proactively addressing cyber security threats, the number of public service Information Technology (IT) professionals has grown. However, in 2016–17, only about 25 per cent of employees within the Computer Systems Administration (CS) occupational group across the Government of Canada were women, compared with 55 per cent of women in the federal public service overall.

In order to best tailor its services and programs to the diverse needs of Canadians, the Government must nurture a strong culture of evidence-based decision-making supported by reliable and insightful data. Improved data on gender and other intersecting identities, and across individuals with different socio-economic characteristics and levels of income, as well as greater access to such data, are essential to high-quality research and analysis, effective program design and delivery, and performance monitoring. These data are also essential to gender budgeting and robust GBA+. Federal departments and agencies have made progress over the last year in strengthening capacity around conducting GBA+ and integrating it into policy development. However, challenges remain, with data gaps and access to data being identified among the main impediments to the ability of federal departments and agencies to conduct robust GBA+.

Impacts of Budget 2018 Investments

In Budget 2018, the Government is making targeted investments to improve its services, strengthen its institutions and enhance its data capabilities in order to make better decisions for Canadians. In doing so, it is proposing key actions to achieve better outcomes based on the needs of specific groups.

Improving Direct Services to Canadians

Under the Community Volunteer Income Tax Program (CVITP), the CRA works with local community organization volunteers to help with the completion of tax returns for eligible Canadians, such as Indigenous Peoples, newcomers, seniors, low-income earners and people with disabilities, allowing these individuals to receive the benefits to which they are entitled (e.g., the Canada Child Benefit and the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax Credit).

[Chart 5.10 - Text version]

An expansion of the CVITP should increase tax filing and benefit uptake rates, improving the quality of life of vulnerable Canadians and, in particular, many Indigenous families. Indeed, data show that Indigenous people tend to have more children, and are more likely to be single parents, than non-Indigenous women. A further expansion of the CVITP will build on recent success in extending the program’s reach to Indigenous communities (see Chart 5.10).

Investments in CRA telephone services to address high caller demand and improve accuracy in agent responses will also deliver positive impacts for low-income groups requiring assistance, including seniors, people with mobility barriers, people living in geographically isolated regions, and people who generally prefer to interact with the CRA by telephone. Furthermore, for citizens who use the CVITP, improved telephone services will better help them find volunteers and clinics in their areas. Similarly, investments announced in Budget 2018 to improve accessibility to EI call centres will ensure that Canadians receive timely and accurate information and assistance regarding EI benefits. Service Canada will also examine opportunities to engage with clients in order to understand the difficulties (e.g., language, accessibility) that certain groups face when accessing EI call centres.

Diversity in the Workforce

Providing high-quality and inclusive service goes hand in hand with ensuring that the Government's organizational structure reflects all Canadians. In regard to IT governance, equality benefits are expected to accrue from the functional leadership role of the Government of Canada’s Chief Information Officer (CIO) in the Information Technology/Information Management (IT/IM) community across government. Specifically, the CIO would ensure the development and sustainability of the IT/IM community through talent management and community development strategies, one of which would be to promote opportunities for women in the Government’s IT workforce.

The IT measures being introduced in Budget 2018 also have the potential to improve representation of employment equity groups, including women and Indigenous Peoples, within the IT/IM community across government by building on ongoing initiatives within Shared Services Canada . These initiatives include the implementation of an Employment Equity Action Plan, the establishment of employment equity and diversity committees, and participation in interdepartmental working groups that seek to increase the representation of women in STEM.

Better, More Inclusive Data

The Government has recognized the need to take steps that target the collection, use and tracking of gender and diversity data in order to enrich our understanding of social, economic, political, financial and environmental issues. In response, Budget 2018 proposes to introduce a new Centre for Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Statistics, and an Indigenous Statistical Capacity Development Initiative, and to develop a broader set of tracking indicators and statistics. These measures will address gaps in the availability of data on gender, race and other intersecting identities to:

Support evidence-based decision-making.

Create more accessible and inclusive information for use by the public.

Advance the level of statistical skills and engagement among Indigenous peoples.

Collect, analyze and disseminate data on members of visible minorities to understand the barriers different groups face and how best to support them with evidence-based policy.

Use the data to measure and track Canada’s progress on achieving shared growth and gender equality objectives.

In addition, to continue acquiring inclusive data on sex and gender in the future, Statistics Canada officials have been working with LGBTQ2 organizations on plans to adjust Census of Population questions and response options to better reflect how people identify themselves—for example, allowing respondents to answer in a non-binary fashion. This will enable the Government to accumulate more data that will better inform GBA+, and consequently enrich policy development, while simultaneously providing a modern census that is inclusive of all Canadians.

Gender Budget—Next Steps

While Budget 2018 takes another important step forward in establishing the Gender Results Framework, measurement of success and greater application of gender-based analysis within the federal government’s decision making, the Government continues to have room for improvement.

In the departmental development of budget proposals, the quality and application of gender-based analysis varied. In some cases, gender-based analysis done by departments was cursory. In other cases, insufficient analyses could be performed due to a lack of data, particularly in relation to intersecting identities.

Experience and expertise in GBA+ is still in development within the federal government. Budget 2017 and Budget 2018 investments in the future Department of Status of Women will provide departments with greater resources and best practices to improve gender-based analysis going forward. Budget 2018 proposes to invest $6.7 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, for Statistics Canada to create a new Centre for Gender, Diversity and Inclusion Statistics, a Centre that will act as GBA+ data hub to support future, evidence-based policy development and decision-making.

Moving forward, the Government commits to publish GBA+ of all budget items starting in Budget 2019.



<<< source: anx-01-en.html >>>

Annex 1: Economic and Fiscal Outlook

Notes: This section incorporates data available up to and including February 16, 2018, unless otherwise indicated. All rates are reported at annual rates unless otherwise noted. All dollar values are expressed in Canadian currency unless otherwise indicated.

Introduction

Thanks to the hard work of Canadians supported by a plan that focuses on investment over austerity, the Canadian economy has been remarkably strong, growing at a pace well above that of all other Group of Seven (G7) countries since mid-2016 (Chart A1.1). Since November 2015, Canadians have created almost 600,000 new jobs and the unemployment rate has fallen from 7.1 per cent to 5.9 per cent—close to its lowest level in over four decades.

[Chart 1.1 - Text version]

Canada’s strong economic growth over this period has been driven by growth in consumer spending, strong regional housing markets as well as supportive monetary and fiscal policy, including the Canada Child Benefit and significant investments in infrastructure. At the same time, stronger global economic conditions have contributed to a recovery in business investment and higher exports. Growth is being shared more broadly across sectors and regions of the country.

Going forward, Canadian economic growth is expected to continue at a more sustainable pace, reflecting in part the combination of higher interest rates and the waning impacts of recent fiscal policy measures. While the level of economic activity is expected to remain strong, growth is anticipated to moderate with little remaining slack in the economy. This is readily apparent in very strong labour market conditions, most notably an unemployment rate that is near a four-decade low, high rates of labour market participation and strengthening wage growth.

Canadian Economic Developments

Unemployment Rate Near its Lowest Level in Four Decades

The economy added 427,300 jobs in 2017, leading the unemployment rate to fall to 5.8 per cent in December 2017—a four-decade low. As of January of this year, it remains near this low level.

The pace of job creation in 2017—an average of 35,600 jobs per month, most of which were full-time positions—was the fastest since 2002 (Chart A1.2). According to the Bank of Canada’s Business Outlook Survey , the share of firms facing more intense labour shortages compared to one year ago is near its highest level in over a decade. This tightening in the labour market bodes well for future wage growth, which picked up in 2017. Consistent with strong employment gains, a sharply lower unemployment rate and an economy that is estimated to be operating close to its potential, year-over-year growth in average weekly earnings has accelerated sharply from no growth in 2016 to 2.8 per cent currently.

[Chart 1.2 - Text version]

Earnings and Confidence Are Expected to Continue to Underpin Growth

Since mid-2016, household consumption has been the main driver of economic growth, increasing at an average annualized pace of 3.9 per cent per quarter (Chart A1.3). Growth has been fairly broad-based across consumption categories and regions. This includes solid growth in most oil producing provinces, notably Alberta, where a recovery in employment is underway.

Going forward, continued growth in employment earnings and improved consumer confidence are expected to continue to underpin solid consumption growth. However, the pace of growth is expected to moderate to its potential or trend rate.

[Chart 1.3 - Text version]

Labour Market Slack Remains in Some Provincial Economies

Particularly strong economic activity in British Columbia, Ontario and Quebec has resulted in historically low unemployment rates for these provinces. In contrast, unemployment rates in the oil-producing provinces, while generally falling, remain significantly higher than prior to the oil price shock in 2014 (Chart A1.4).

As well, despite the national unemployment rate being near a four-decade low, long-term unemployment 1 as a share of total unemployment remains above pre-recession levels for all age groups (although the rate for individuals between 25 and 54 has improved).

[Chart 1.4 - Text version]

Recent Indicators Point to Ongoing Business Investment Gains

Business investment is growing again. The pick-up has been underpinned by stronger economic activity in both the resource and non-resource sectors and much-improved business sentiment. The Bank of Canada’s Business Outlook Survey shows a strong improvement in business investment intentions over the last year (Chart A1.5).

Plans to increase investment are now broad-based across all regions and sectors. Respondents to the Bank of Canada’s survey report favourable demand conditions and, together with higher capacity pressures, plans to expand capacity.

Capacity utilization has also risen sharply and is currently close to its pre-recession peak. In the Business Outlook Survey , the share of firms reporting that they would have some or significant difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand has risen. However, the degree of slack continues to differ across regions, with pressures being the most acute in British Columbia and becoming more apparent in central Canada. In contrast, excess capacity remains in energy-producing regions. Together with improved business investment intentions, this points to a further recovery in business investment going forward.

[Chart 1.5 - Text version]

Export Growth Is Anticipated to Rise

Total real exports have risen modestly since mid-2014, as solid growth in exports of services and energy commodities has been offset by weakness in non-energy goods exports (Chart A1.6).

In particular, export growth has been lower than might have been expected given the significant depreciation in the Canadian dollar since mid-2014. That being said, it is important to recognize that the currencies of many other important U.S. trading partners—with whom Canada competes in the U.S. and other international markets—have also depreciated since 2014.

Going forward, export growth is expected to grow in line with foreign demand. The positive global growth backdrop is expected to boost demand for Canadian exports.

[Chart 1.6 - Text version]

Crude Oil Prices Have Increased, but the Discount on Canadian Oil Has Also Risen

Global crude oil prices continued to increase in 2017, with the price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil averaging just under US$51 per barrel, compared with an average of US$43 per barrel in 2016 (Chart A1.7). Prices were supported by stronger global demand and a supply agreement between Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) nations and 10 non-OPEC producers to restrain their collective output. As a result, in January WTI prices rose as high as US$66 per barrel for the first time since December 2014, before declining slightly in February.

Increasing U.S. production, driven by growth in the shale oil sector, has put a limit on price increases. U.S. crude oil production increased steadily through 2017, reaching its highest level in more than three decades. The U.S. Energy Information Administration estimates that U.S. crude oil production will increase further this year, reaching a historical high of 10 million barrels per day. Observers have noted that should the U.S. exceed these production levels, it could potentially overtake Saudi Arabia and Russia to become the world’s top crude oil producer.

The recent rise in global benchmark prices has not been matched by higher prices for Western Canadian producers. While Canadian production has continued to rise, reflecting past investments, pipeline capacity constraints have limited producers’ options for moving their products to U.S. markets. As a result, the discount on the Canadian effective price vis-à-vis WTI has risen to over US$20 to date in early 2018, more than double its 2017 average (US$9.61).

Looking ahead, crude oil futures prices continue to suggest that the benchmark WTI oil price will ease from current levels back to the US$50 range over the forecast horizon. Private sector economists surveyed by the Department of Finance Canada currently project that WTI prices will improve modestly over time to US$62 per barrel by 2022. These private sector projections are broadly on par with those in the 2017 Fall Economic Statement .

[Chart 1.7 - Text version]

Starting in 2017, Western Canadian crude oil supply was projected to outstrip the combined capacity of existing pipelines and the region’s refining capacity (Chart A1.8). This means that the industry is now having to rely on higher-cost rail to transport a growing share of supply until additional pipeline capacity comes on stream.

Further, with very little spare capacity, the impact of unexpected pipeline or refinery shutdowns (such as the recent temporary shutdown of the TransCanada Keystone pipeline) could become larger, resulting in increased volatility in prices for Canadian producers. This situation is expected to prevail into 2020 until major pipeline projects—such as the Trans Mountain Expansion Project, the TransCanada Keystone XL pipeline and the replacement of Enbridge’s Line 3—become operational, diversifying our export markets and providing additional capacity.

The discount on the Canadian effective price (CEP) vis-à-vis WTI has risen to over US$20, more than double its 2017 average (US$9.61). Futures contracts currently suggest that the differential between WTI and the CEP will narrow to the US$15 range by the summer, in line with a return to full capacity of the TransCanada Keystone pipeline and as rail transport adjusts to higher volumes, and to remain at this level on average over the 2018–2022 forecast horizon.

Housing Market Pressures Easing

Following rapid growth in prices and sales in recent years, housing market conditions have become more balanced in Toronto and Vancouver, and their surrounding regions.

While price gains for all dwelling types have been robust in these markets over the past few years, price growth of single-detached homes has slowed recently. Price growth for other dwelling types—notably apartment condominiums—has remained strong. Tight supply conditions in these markets remain an important factor affecting prices. Meanwhile, housing activity in the oil-producing provinces had been soft but has picked up in recent months, while activity in the rest of the country remains positive (Chart A1.9).

Going forward, housing demand across the country should continue to be supported by solid job and income gains, but tempered by rising interest rates and recent changes to mortgage underwriting Guideline B-20 for federally regulated lenders (including a mortgage rate stress test for uninsured mortgages).

[Chart 1.9 - Text version]

Global Economic Developments

Global Economic Activity Is Firming

Internationally, economic momentum continues to strengthen. Following two consecutive years of deceleration, global growth finally accelerated in 2017, and was highly synchronized across regions with almost every part of the world registering growth. Building on this momentum, the pace of global economic expansion is expected to pick up further in 2018. In addition, the share of countries in recession is projected to decline to a record low (Chart A1.10).

However, the acceleration in global economic activity is expected to be somewhat constrained. While economic activity in emerging economies as a whole is expected to strengthen this year and next, most advanced economies are already growing faster than their estimated potential or trend growth rates, and thus as a group are not expected to accelerate further.

[Chart 1.10 - Text version]

Global Financial Conditions Remain Supportive Despite a Recent Pullback in Equities

Monetary policy continues to be very accommodative, with the policy interest rates of most major central banks remaining low and some central banks continuing to deploy extraordinary monetary policy measures to support economic growth, close output gaps and help revive inflation.

Equity markets, which rose over much of the past two years, have recently seen declines accompanied by a surge in volatility. While sudden, these declines brought most indices back to where they were late last fall. Moreover, the factors that have supported markets for most of the past year remain largely in place, including an improving global economic backdrop, rising expectations for corporate profits, still highly accommodative monetary policy, and investors’ continued search for yield.

Improving economic momentum is leading a number of central banks—most notably the U.S. Federal Reserve—to gradually increase their policy interest rates and reduce their extraordinary measures (Chart A1.11). In this context, some longer-term interest rates have risen modestly, though they remain near historic lows. As central banks continue to normalize monetary policy, interest rates are expected to continue to gradually rise.

[Chart 1.11 - Text version]

The U.S. Economy Is Operating at Potential

In the United States, the long recovery from the effects of the Great Recession appears to be complete. The U.S. economy has been operating near or even slightly above its potential in recent years, after almost a decade of running below its long-term trend level (Chart A1.12).

Alongside strong output growth, the U.S. labour market continues to strengthen, with solid job creation and steady gains in the employment rate of the 25 to 54 age group. The unemployment rate, at 4.1 per cent since October 2017, is at its lowest level since 2001. However, average hourly wages grew 2.5 per cent in 2017, broadly the same increase as in 2016. While wage growth has gradually trended higher since the end of the recession, the progression of both monthly and annual gains has been uneven.

[Chart 1.12 - Text version]

Looking forward, the U.S. economy could see improved growth in 2018. However, the U.S. federal government deficit is projected to grow to over one trillion dollars next year, or about 5 per cent of GDP. Over the coming months, the Department of Finance Canada will conduct detailed analysis of the U.S. federal tax reforms to assess any potential impacts on Canada.

European Economies Surprised on the Upside in 2017

[Chart 1.13 - Text version]

In the United Kingdom, growth slipped from 1.9 per cent in 2016 to 1.8 per cent last year, and is expected to continue to gradually slow over the near term. Weak consumer confidence and business investment, along with uncertainty related to the UK’s future trade relationship with the European Union (EU), should weigh on UK growth.

Canada is well placed to benefit from the steady economic activity in Europe. The Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA), which entered into force on September 21, 2017, eliminates virtually all tariffs on goods between Canada and the EU. The agreement gives Canadian exporters new access to one of the world’s largest single markets—at $21.8 trillion, the EU represents 22 per cent of global GDP, with half a billion consumers.

Strong Growth in China and Emerging Economies

Among the major emerging economies, overall growth firmed in 2017. This was largely due to recessions ending in Brazil and Russia, rather than a marked acceleration of growth in other emerging nations.

Nonetheless, growth among emerging economies is expected to continue to increase in 2018, mainly reflecting a pick-up in growth in Latin America and the Middle East, in part attributable to firmer commodity prices. In addition, a rising rate of economic expansion in India will further support the overall rate of growth in emerging economies (Chart A1.14).

However, a number of emerging economies remain vulnerable to sudden shifts in capital flows that could be triggered by an unexpected sharp appreciation of the U.S. dollar or a global repricing of risk. This is particularly true for countries with significant amounts of U.S.-dollar-denominated debt.

In China, growth is expected to continue to gradually slow in 2018 and beyond. However, China will continue to grow faster than most other countries, and faster than expected one year ago. Economic activity is expected to be supported by stronger external demand, and economic reforms and deleveraging are taking place very gradually to reduce the risk of an abrupt growth slowdown.

[Chart 1.14 - Text version]

Canada has gained important new market access into the fast-growing Asia-Pacific region. On January 23, 2018, Canada was among the eleven countries that successfully concluded negotiations on the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP). This agreement will provide access to markets totalling $11.5 trillion, representing 12 per cent of the global economy and over 450 million consumers. This includes key markets such as Japan, Malaysia and Vietnam—representing $9.7 trillion in GDP—with which Canada has no existing preferential trading relationship. Nearly 87 per cent of tariffs faced by Canadian exporters will be eliminated upon the entry into force of the CPTPP, with most remaining tariffs to be eliminated within 15 years.

Budget 2018 Economic Outlook

The economic and fiscal projections contained in this budget are based on the December 2017 survey of private sector economists. Details of the full private sector economic outlook are presented in Annex 2.

In summary, economists expect real GDP growth of 3.0 per cent in 2017, the same rate as in the 2017 Fall Economic Statement but significantly higher than the 2.1 per cent originally projected in Budget 2017. The outlook for real GDP growth is slightly improved for 2018 but little changed thereafter (Table A1.1). The outlook for GDP inflation (the broadest measure of economy-wide price inflation) has been revised down in both 2017 and 2018 compared to the 2017 Fall Economic Statement forecast. Going forward, the outlook for GDP inflation is broadly in line with the previous forecast.

As a result, expectations for growth in nominal GDP—the broadest measure of the tax base—have been revised down for 2017 (from 5.5 per cent to 5.2 per cent), but are largely unchanged thereafter. The level of nominal GDP over the projection horizon is $4 billion lower per year, on average, than was anticipated in the 2017 Fall Economic Statement , but still more than $20 billion higher than projected in Budget 2017.

Risk Assessment

While the global and Canadian economies have evolved largely as expected since the Fall Economic Statement , both upside and downside risks remain which could affect the economic outlook. In particular:

Stronger and more durable growth in the global economy than currently expected would benefit Canadian economic activity.

Household spending and business investment in Canada could continue to surprise on the upside given elevated business and consumer confidence, tightened business capacity and labour market conditions, and rising wage growth.

As global oil markets continue to move closer to balance, oil prices could be higher than expected in the medium term. Higher-than-expected demand for oil with more significant supply constraints in the future, reflecting recent cuts in global oil and gas investment, could tip the balance towards higher oil prices, benefitting income and investment in Canada. However, a persistent or widening gap between Western Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select crude oil prices could partially erode this benefit.

At the same time, there are a number of downside risks to the outlook.

Uncertainty regarding the outcome of North American Free Trade Agreement negotiations as well as a notable shift towards more protectionism globally could impact Canada.

As some advanced economy central banks, such as the U.S. Federal Reserve, continue to normalize monetary policy, financial conditions could tighten faster than anticipated, especially as they have remained surprisingly favourable over the past year. Tighter-than-expected financial conditions could create turbulence in world financial markets, especially in the context of elevated market valuations, although the recent pullback in global markets has relieved some pressure. This would affect Canadian businesses and households through a combination of higher interest rates, negative wealth effects and/or lower confidence.

High household debt remains a key domestic vulnerability for Canadian consumption and housing activity in the case of a large shock to income, house prices or interest rates.

Overall, the risks to the December 2017 economic outlook are broadly balanced in the short term, and continuing engagement with survey participants has confirmed that the outlook is an appropriate basis for fiscal planning. Budget 2018 includes an adjustment for risk of $3.0 billion in 2018–19 and future years to account for risks and uncertainty in the economic and fiscal forecast.

Budget 2018 Fiscal Outlook

Baseline economic and year-to-date developments since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement (FES 2017) have improved the outlook for the budgetary balance over the forecast horizon, by an average of approximately $3.3 billion per year. A detailed summary of changes to the fiscal outlook since FES 2017 is provided in Annex 2.

Continued Investments in a Strong Middle Class

Budget 2018 builds on the Government’s previous actions, and proposes smart, targeted investments that will help create the conditions required to foster economic growth and provide more opportunities for the middle class. The fiscal implications of developments since FES 2017, including the costs of Budget 2018 proposals, are shown in Table A1.2 below.

A Downward Deficit and Debt Ratio Track

Growth-generating investments in people, in communities and in the economy are balanced by sound fiscal management. The federal debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to decline gradually over the forecast horizon, reaching 28.4 per cent in 2022–23. According to the IMF, Canada’s net debt-to-GDP ratio is by far the lowest among G7 countries and less than half the G7 average (Chart A1.15).

[Chart 1.15 - Text version]

The Budget 2018 fiscal track continues to show steady improvements in the Government’s annual budgetary balance, which is nearly $7 billion lower annually, on average, than projected in Budget 2017.

[Chart 1.16 - Text version]

The Government will maintain this downward deficit and debt ratio track. Low debt levels support economic growth and intergenerational equity by keeping interest costs low and preserving flexibility to face future economic shocks and challenges.

Continued Economic Strength Would Accelerate Deficit Reduction

The fiscal projections presented in this budgetare based on an average of the December 2017 private sector economic outlook survey. However, economists surveyed offered a wide range of views regarding future economic growth and, therefore, the path of nominal GDP (the broadest measure of the tax base). Changes in economic growth assumptions can also have large impacts on the budgetary balance and debt-to-GDP profile over an extended projection horizon.

For example, if the Government based current fiscal projections on the average of the top four individual forecasts for nominal GDP growth—which is equivalent to nominal GDP growth being 0.3 percentage points per year higher, on average, than in the full survey—the budgetary balance would improve by $3.0 billion per year on average (Chart A1.17).

[Chart 1.17 - Text version]

Conversely, basing fiscal projections on the average of the bottom four individual forecasts for nominal GDP growth—which is equivalent to nominal GDP growth being 0.3 percentage points per year lower, on average, than in the full survey—the budgetary balance would worsen by $3.5 billion per year on average, and the federal debt-to-GDP ratio would still decline, but be 1.2 percentage points higher than projected in 2022–23.

1 Unemployed for 27 weeks or more.



<<< source: anx-02-en.html >>>

Annex 2 - Details of Economic and Fiscal Projections

Contents

Budget 2018 Economic and Fiscal Projections are detailed in this Annex in the following sections:

1. Private Sector Economic Projections

2. Economic and Fiscal Developments and Policy Actions since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement

2.1 Impact of Economic and Fiscal Developments since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement

2.2 Policy Actions since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement

2.3 Other Budget 2018 Measures (Not Included in Previous Chapters)

3. Fiscal Projections

3.1 Summary Statement of Transactions

3.2 Outlook for Budgetary Revenues

3.3 Outlook for Program Expenses

3.4 Financial Source/Requirement

4.Supplementary Information

4.1 Budget 2018 Investments by Department (Cash Basis)

4.2 Reconciliation of Budget 2018 Expenses with 2018–19 Planned Estimates

4.3 Sensitivity of Fiscal Projections to Economic Shocks

4.4 Update on Allocation of Infrastructure Investments

1. Private Sector Economic Projections

The average of private sector forecasts has been used as the basis for fiscal planning since 1994 and introduces an element of independence into the Government’s fiscal forecast. This practice has been supported by international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund.

The Department of Finance Canada regularly surveys private sector economists on their views on the outlook for the Canadian economy. The economic forecast presented in this section is based on a survey conducted in December 2017.

The December 2017 survey includes the views of 14 private sector economists:

BMO Capital Markets,

Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec,

Canadian Federation of Independent Business,

CIBC World Markets,

The Conference Board of Canada,

Desjardins,

IHS Global Insight,

Industrial Alliance Insurance and Financial Services Inc.,

Laurentian Bank Securities,

National Bank Financial Markets,

Royal Bank of Canada,

Scotiabank,

TD Bank Financial Group, and

the University of Toronto (Policy and Economic Analysis Program).

2. Economic and Fiscal Developments and Policy Actions since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement

2.1 Impact of Economic and Fiscal Developments since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement

Relative to the 2017 Fall Economic Statement , budgetary revenues are projected to be lower in 2017–18 and 2018–19 primarily as a result of a downward revision to projected revenues from consolidated Crown corporations (particularly the Canadian Commercial Corporation) in the other revenue category. Revenues are up slightly over the remainder of the forecast horizon, due largely to higher projected excise taxes and duties.

Relative to FES 2017, income tax revenues are expected to be higher over most of the projection horizon. In 2017–18, upward revisions to corporate income tax and non-resident income tax revenues—primarily reflecting year-to-date developments—result in an increase of $1.0 billion. Over the remainder of the forecast horizon, income tax revenues were revised up slightly by an average of $0.2 billion, per year.

Excise taxes and duties have been revised up relative to FES 2017 due to stronger-than-expected year-to-date fiscal results for customs and import duties and a projected strengthening in the taxable consumption base.

Employment Insurance (EI) premium revenues are projected to be lower than at the time of FES 2017. This is a result of the lower projected unemployment rate, which results in lower projected EI benefits and a projected decrease in the EI premium rate on a status quo basis (before Budget 2018 measures).

With respect to expenses, major transfers to persons are projected to be lower throughout the forecast horizon compared to FES 2017, as the improved labour market outlook leads to lower projected EI benefit expenses.

Major transfers to other levels of government are broadly similar to FES 2017 projections. The small increase in 2017–18 is due to a lower expected value for the Quebec Abatement. The increase in the last three years of the horizon reflects higher Territorial Formula Financing transfers compared to FES 2017.

Compared to FES 2017, direct program expenses are lower, reflecting lower projected expenses for consolidated Crown corporations (particularly the Canadian Commercial Corporation), year-to-date results (including lower bad debt expenses on tax receivables) and updated departmental outlooks. Partially offsetting this, expenses related to pensions and employee future benefits are higher, reflecting the actuarial loss on plan liabilities as a result of lower projected interest rates compared to FES 2017.

Public debt charges are higher in 2017–18 compared to FES 2017, as a decrease in expected returns on pension fund assets leads to higher interest expenses. In 2018–19 and 2019–20, public debt charges are lower as lower forecast interest rates more than offset higher pension fund interest expenses from lower expected returns. From 2020–21, increases to both pension fund interest expenses and higher financial requirements lead to increased public debt charges compared to FES 2017.

2.2 Policy Actions Announced since the 2017 Fall Economic Statement

2.3 Other Budget 2018 Measures (Not Included in Previous Chapters)

3. Fiscal Projections

3.1 Summary Statement of Transactions

3.2 Outlook for Budgetary Revenues

Table A2.7 sets out the Government’s projection for budgetary revenues. Overall, budgetary revenues are expected to increase by 5.5 per cent in 2017–18, reflecting strong economic growth and year-to-date results. Over the remainder of the forecast horizon, revenues are projected to grow at an average annual rate of 3.8 per cent, in line with projected growth in nominal GDP.

Personal income tax revenues—the largest component of budgetary revenues—are projected to increase by $8.6 billion, or 6.0 per cent, to $152.3 billion in 2017–18. The strong growth in 2017–18 reflects an improved economic outlook and the unwinding of the impact of tax planning that suppressed revenues in 2016–17, whereby high-income individuals recognized additional income in the 2015 tax year and lower income in the 2016 tax year when the 33 per cent tax bracket came into effect. Over the remainder of the projection period, personal income tax revenues are forecast to increase faster than growth in nominal GDP, averaging 4.5 per cent annually, reflecting the progressive nature of the income tax system combined with projected real income gains.

Corporate income tax revenues are projected to increase by $6.0 billion, or 14.2 per cent, to $48.2 billion in 2017–18, as a result of higher corporate profits and the associated strength in recent year-to-date financial results. Revenues are then expected to decline in 2018–19 by 1.8 per cent due in part to the reduction in the small business tax rate announced in the 2017 Fall Economic Statement as well as a projected dampening of corporate profits. Over the remainder of the projection period, corporate income tax revenues are expected to grow at an average annual rate of 2.5 per cent, less than the rate of growth in nominal GDP, reflecting the anticipated use of loss carry-forwards, and the reduction of the small business tax rate to 9 per cent.

Non-resident income tax revenues are income taxes paid by non-residents on Canadian-sourced income, notably dividends and interest payments. For 2017–18, non-resident income tax revenues are projected to increase by $1.1 billion, or 15.2 per cent, based on strong year-to-date results and an expected increase in dividend, investment and interest income from stronger corporate profits. Over the remainder of the forecast horizon, they are projected to grow at an average annual rate of 1.9 per cent.

Goods and Services Tax (GST) revenues are forecast to grow by 6.2 per cent in 2017–18 based on recent financial results and strong projected growth in taxable consumption over the rest of the year. Over the remainder of the projection period, GST revenues are forecast to grow by 3.6 per cent per year, on average, based on the outlook for taxable consumption.

Customs import duties are projected to grow 1.2 per cent, in 2017–18. Over the remainder of the projection horizon, annual growth in customs import duties is projected to slow to an average of 0.5 per cent, largely due to the expected coming into force of the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Other excise taxes and duties (OETD) are projected to increase by $0.1 billion, or 0.8 per cent, to $11.6 billion in 2017–18. OETD revenues are then expected to increase by 4.6 per cent in 2018–19, partially due to expected additional excise duty revenues from cannabis legalization. Over the remainder of the projection horizon, OETD revenues are expected to grow at an average annual rate of 1.3 per cent based on historical consumption trends.

EI premium revenues are projected to decline by 7.1 per cent in 2017–18 due to a reduction in the EI premium rate to $1.63 per $100 of insurable earnings as a result of the introduction of the seven-year break-even mechanism in 2017. EI premium revenues are then expected to increase in 2018–19 as the EI premium rate increases to $1.66 per $100 of insurable earnings for 2018 (as announced by the Canada Employment Insurance Commission). Over the remainder of the forecast horizon, EI premium revenues are expected to continue on their upward trend based on projected growth in insurable earnings and a projected EI premium rate for 2019 of $1.66 per $100 of insurable earnings, after taking into account new EI measures announced in Budget 2018.

Other revenues are made up of three broad components: net income from enterprise Crown corporations; other program revenues, particularly from consolidated Crown corporation revenues, returns on investments, proceeds from the sales of goods and services, and other miscellaneous revenues; and revenues in the Exchange Fund Account.

Enterprise Crown corporation revenues are projected to increase by 2.7 per cent in 2017–18, and grow at an average annual rate of 9.2 per cent over the remainder of the forecast horizon, generally reflecting the outlooks presented in respective enterprise Crown corporation corporate plans.

Other program revenues are affected by consolidated Crown corporation revenues, interest and exchange rate movements (which affect the Canadian-dollar value of foreign-denominated assets), and flow-through items that give rise to an offsetting expense and therefore do not impact the budgetary balance. These revenues are projected to increase by 1.2 per cent in 2017–18. Over the remainder of the projection period, other program revenues are projected to increase at an average annual rate of 3.9 per cent, reflecting the impact of higher interest rates and outlooks presented in consolidated Crown corporation corporate plans.

Net foreign exchange revenues, which consist mainly of returns on investments held in the Exchange Fund Account, are volatile and sensitive to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and foreign interest rates. These revenues are expected to decrease in 2017–18, due in large part to a decrease in the expected return on assets held in the Exchange Fund Account. Over the remainder of the projection period, net foreign exchange revenues are projected to grow at an average annual rate of 16.6 per cent, reflecting a projected increase in interest rates and the anticipated appreciation of the Canadian dollar by private sector forecasters.

The Employment Insurance Operating Account operates within the Consolidated Revenue Fund. As such, EI-related revenues and expenses that are credited and charged to the Account, respectively, in accordance with the Employment Insurance Act , are consolidated with those of the Government, and impact the budgetary balance. For consistency with the EI premium rate, which is set on a calendar-year basis with the objective of having the Account break even over time, the annual and cumulative balances of the Account are also presented on a calendar-year basis.

The EI Operating Account is expected to record an annual deficit of $1.2 billion in 2017, and a deficit of $0.4 billion in 2018, due to a reduction in the EI premium rate as a result of the seven-year break-even mechanism. The estimated seven-year break-even rate for 2019 is $1.66 per $100 of insurable earnings, unchanged from the 2018 premium rate. For fiscal planning purposes, an EI premium rate of $1.66 has been applied from 2019 onwards such that the EI Operating Account achieves cumulative balance by 2025.

3.3 Outlook for Program Expenses

Table A2.8 provides an overview of the projections for program expenses, on an accrual basis, by major component. A more detailed outlook for 2018–19 can be found in Table A2.12, which also provides a full reconciliation of the planned estimates and the budget outlook. Program expenses consist of major transfers to persons, major transfers to other levels of government and direct program expenses.

Major transfers to persons are projected to increase from $94.4 billion in 2017–18 to $116.1 billion in 2022–23. Major transfers to persons consist of elderly, EI and children’s benefits.

Elderly benefits, which are comprised of Old Age Security, Guaranteed Income Supplement and Allowance payments to qualifying seniors, are projected to grow from $50.9 billion in 2017–18 to $67.0 billion in 2022–23, or approximately 5.6 per cent per year. The expected increase in elderly benefits is due to projected consumer price inflation, to which benefits are fully indexed, and a projected increase in the population of seniors.

EI benefits are projected to be $20.1 billion in 2017–18. Over the remainder of the projection period, EI benefits are projected to grow moderately, averaging 3.6 per cent annually, reflecting growth in average weekly benefits.

Children’s benefits are projected to rise from $23.4 billion in 2017–18 to $25.1 billion in 2022–23, or approximately 1.4 per cent annually, largely reflecting the indexation of benefits beginning in 2018–19.

Major transfers to other levels of government, which include the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the Canada Social Transfer (CST), Equalization, Territorial Formula Financing and the Gas Tax Fund, among others, are expected to increase over the forecast horizon, from $70.5 billion in 2017–18 to $84.7 billion in 2022–23.

The CHT is projected to grow from $37.1 billion in 2017–18 to $44.9 billion in 2022–23. The CHT grows in line with a three-year moving average of nominal GDP growth, with funding guaranteed to increase by at least 3.0 per cent per year. The CST is legislated to grow at 3.0 per cent per year. Gas Tax Fund payments are indexed at 2.0 per cent per year, with increases applied in $100 million increments. Announced in Budget 2017, home care and mental health transfers in support of provincial and territorial home care and mental health initiatives will grow from $0.3 billion in 2017–18 to $1.2 billion in 2022–23.

Direct program expenses are projected to rise to $139.7 billion in 2017–18 and further to $149.3 billion in 2022–23. Direct program expenses include transfer payments administered by departments and operating expenses.

The projected increase in direct program expenses is driven, in large part, by an increase in transfer payments administered by departments over the forecast horizon, including transfers to provincial, municipal and Indigenous governments and post-secondary institutions for investment in infrastructure. Overall, transfer payments are projected to increase from $44.1 billion in 2017–18 to $52.0 billion in 2022–23.

Operating expenses reflect the cost of doing business for more than 100 government departments, agencies and Crown corporations, and are projected to reach $95.6 billion in 2017–18, reflecting year-to-date results and the introduction of Pension for Life for veterans, which results in a significant one-time expense in 2017–18. From 2018–19 onwards, operating expenses are projected to grow by about 1.1 per cent annually, reaching $97.3 billion in 2022–23. The growth in operating expenses is composed of growth in departmental expenses, which is partially offset by falling expenses related to pensions and employee future benefits, reflecting the projected rise in long-term interest rates.

3.4 Financial Source/Requirement

The budgetary balance is presented on a full accrual basis of accounting, recording government revenues and expenses when they are earned or incurred, regardless of when the cash is received or paid.

In contrast, the financial source/requirement measures the difference between cash coming in to the Government and cash going out. This measure is affected not only by the budgetary balance, but also by the Government’s non-budgetary transactions. These include changes in federal employee pension liabilities; changes in non-financial assets; investing activities through loans, investments and advances; and changes in other financial assets and liabilities, including foreign exchange activities.

As shown in Table A2.9, a financial requirement is projected over the entire forecast period. The projected financial requirements for 2017–18 to 2022–23 largely reflect requirements associated with the budgetary balance, increases in retained earnings of enterprise Crown corporations, and growth in other assets, including financing of the Exchange Fund Account.

A financial source is projected for pensions and other accounts for 2017–18 to 2019–20. Pensions and other accounts include the activities of the Government of Canada’s employee pension plans and those of federally appointed judges and Members of Parliament, as well as a variety of other employee future benefit plans, such as health care and dental plans, and disability and other benefits for veterans and others. The financial source for pensions and other accounts largely reflects adjustments for pension and benefit expenses not funded in the period.

Financial requirements for non-financial assets mainly reflect the difference between cash outlays for the acquisition of new tangible capital assets and the amortization of capital assets included in the budgetary balance. They also include disposals of tangible capital assets and changes in inventories and prepaid expenses. A net cash requirement of $3.0 billion is estimated for 2018–19.

Loans, investments and advances include the Government’s investments in enterprise Crown corporations, such as Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC), Export Development Canada, the Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC) and Farm Credit Canada (FCC). They also include loans, investments and advances to national and provincial governments and international organizations, and for government programs. The requirements for enterprise Crown corporations projected from 2017–18 to 2022–23 reflect retained earnings of enterprise Crown corporations as well as the Government’s decision in Budget 2007 to meet all the borrowing needs of CMHC, BDC and FCC through its own domestic debt issuance. In general, loans, investments and advances are expected to generate additional revenues for the Government in the form of interest or additional net profits of enterprise Crown corporations, which partly offset debt charges associated with these borrowing requirements. These revenues are reflected in projections of the budgetary balance.

Other transactions include the payment of tax refunds and other accounts payable, the collection of taxes and other accounts receivable, the conversion of other accrual adjustments included in the budgetary balance into cash, as well as foreign exchange activities. Projected cash requirements associated with other transactions mainly reflect forecast increases in the Government’s official international reserves held in the Exchange Fund Account, as per the prudential liquidity plan, as well as projected growth in accounts receivable, in line with historical trends.

4. Supplementary Information

In the Fall of 2016, the Government proposed reforms to the Estimates process to enhance transparency and accountability. In June 2017, the House of Commons agreed to change its Standing Orders so that the tabling of the Main Estimates for the next two years can take place in April rather than in February. This measure will help to ensure that more budget initiatives can be included in the Main Estimates on which Parliamentarians will vote.

In this spirit, to further improve transparency and accountability, this budget includes a detailed reconciliation between accrual expenses forecasted in Budget 2018 and the authorities to be reflected in the planned 2018–19 Estimates. Specifically, Budget 2018 includes: (i) a detailed summary table outlining Budget 2018 measures by department on a cash basis (Section 4.1); and (ii) a detailed table reconciling the Budget 2018 expense forecast with the planned 2018–19 Estimates (Section 4.2).

4.1 Policy Actions and Budget Investments by Department (Cash Basis)

4.2 Reconciliation of Budget 2018 Expenses with 2018–19 Planned Estimates

Under this reconciliation, the accrual expense forecast is decomposed into eight building blocks beginning with Planned Estimates authorities, Budget 2018 measures, additional Estimates authorities for which Parliamentary approval may be sought later in the fiscal year, amounts forecasted to remain unspent or carried forward from total authorities, further spending financed by departmental revenues, spending-like programs delivered through the tax system, and remaining accrual and consolidation adjustments required to put the forecast on the same accounting basis as the Public Accounts of Canada Volume I. These building blocks are consistent with concepts and definitions used in the Public Accounts of Canada Volume II.

1. Planned Estimates

The Estimates reflect authorities approved in previous budgets and confirmed by Treasury Board for all organizations that receive a voted appropriation from Parliament. The Estimates also include, for information, forecasts of spending under most statutory authorities previously provided by Parliament.

The Estimates are presented on a modified cash basis of accounting. Figures are net of certain revenues collected by departments, which departments can re-spend to reduce the level of appropriations sought from Parliament.

The Estimates are designed primarily to support Parliament’s scrutiny of the portion of government spending that requires annual approval through the appropriation acts. As such, they exclude several programs where authorities and reporting to Parliament are established under separate regimes, most notably the Employment Insurance Operating Account and programs delivered through the tax system.

Estimates include both budgetary authorities (for expenditures which impact the income statement) and non-budgetary authorities (for balance sheet transactions). As the objective in this reconciliation table is to identify transactions and adjustments that affect accrual expenses, the Planned Estimates column includes only budgetary authorities.

2. Budget 2018 measures

This column is based on the Budget 2018 measures by department (cash basis) in Table A2.11, adjusted to follow the same accounting and presentational conventions as the Estimates (for example, as discussed above, amounts related to the Employment Insurance Operating Account do not flow through the Estimates).

Measures affecting departments other than the 23 identified in the table are grouped in the “Other direct program expenses” row.

3. Other anticipated authorities

This category captures a range of forecasted authorities for measures and mechanisms that have been approved in principle off cycle or in previous budgets, or that have already been authorized under existing legislation, and that are expected to appear in a Supplementary Estimates or the Public Accounts.

For example, a revolving fund or a department with multi-year appropriations may have authority to carry forward unspent authorities from 2017–18 into 2018–19, but that amount cannot be confirmed until the audited financial results for 2017–18 become available.

Similarly, the Treasury Board manages several central votes for carry-forwards, certain eligible personnel expenditures and other contingencies that are initially presented under Treasury Board Secretariat and subsequently allocated to departments throughout the year as departments meet eligibility requirements.

Another common reason authorities are not sought until a Supplementary Estimates is that a previous budget or off-cycle measure has not yet received the supporting policy or program approval.

There are also certain statutory authorities, often small, which may not be included for information in the Estimates but which are reported in the Public Accounts.

Note that the sum of the values in the first three columns represent a forecast of total budgetary authorities available by department, consistent with the concepts and definitions applied in the Public Accounts of Canada Volume II Section 1 Table 5.

4. Unspent/carried forward

This column is the forecasted difference between the forecast of potential spending authorities for 2018–19 (authorities from the first three columns) and anticipated spending over that period (net expenditures in the fifth column).

Specifically, the Estimates show the maximum amount of appropriated funding that can be spent at a point in time, while the budget projects the amount of spending that will likely be spent over the entire course of the fiscal year.

The budget forecast recognizes that some amount of authorities included in the Estimates will remain unspent at the end of the fiscal year. These unspent amounts are either carried forward automatically into subsequent years or they ‘lapse’. Amounts that technically lapse in one year are often spent in a subsequent year as they are reprofiled and included in a future Estimates.

Lapses are influenced by many factors, such as contract and project delays, uncommitted authorities in Treasury Board managed central votes, as well as departmental funds management practices to ensure that spending does not exceed the authorities approved by Parliament.

In terms of Public Accounts Volume II Section 1 Table 5, this column aligns with the sum of ‘Available for use in subsequent years’ and ‘Lapsed’.

5. Net expenditures

Expenditures are largely funded through voted appropriations and statutory authorities, and to a limited extent through departmental revenues. In the Estimates, authorities and expenditures are presented on a “net” basis, i.e. excluding expenditures expected to be funded by departmental revenues, in order to reflect the expected impact on the Consolidated Revenue Fund.

Figures in this column are presented on the same modified cash basis of accounting as the Estimates, and represent a forecast of the corresponding amount in Public Accounts Volume II Section 1 Table 5.

6. Netted revenues

Certain expenditures are funded through departmental revenues. Accrual expenses in the budget and the Public Accounts are on a ‘gross’ basis, so revenues that are netted against expenditures in the Estimates are added back in order to arrive at forecasted accrual expenses. Summing the figures in the Net expenditures column with the Netted revenues column would yield ‘Total gross expenditures’ on a modified cash basis of accounting. Net expenditures, Netted revenues and Total gross expenditures are reported by department in Public Accounts Volume II Section 1 Table 3.

7. Tax credits & repayments

This column captures expenditures forecasted to be delivered through the tax system, but not shown in the Estimates. Costs related to the Canada Child Benefit are the largest component in this column (shown in the Major transfers row). Tax credits and repayments that are considered direct program expenses are shown in the Canada Revenue Agency row, and include incentives for research and development, the Canada Workers Benefit as well as refundable tax credits.

Parliament does not authorize annual spending for such tax expenditures and refundable tax credits, which are instead legislated through the Income Tax Act. These expenditures are reported in Public Accounts Volume II Section 1 Table 3a. In addition, the Department of Finance’s annual Report on Federal Tax Expenditures includes both historical and forecasted values by program.

8. Accrual & consolidation adjustments

This column captures other differences in accounting basis and scope between the Estimates and the Budget/Public Accounts of Canada.

The Budget is presented on an accrual basis whereas the Estimates are presented on a modified cash basis. As a result, certain items such as acquisitions of tangible capital assets will be reported differently between the two publications. Under accrual accounting, the cost to acquire an asset is amortized over the expected life of the asset, whereas under modified cash accounting, the cost is recognized as disbursements are made. For example, if a building is acquired that has a useful life of 30 years, then accrual accounting will see the cost amortized over the 30-year life of the asset, while cash accounting will portray the cost only in the first few years when the payments are made.

Other examples of accrual adjustments include bad debt expenses, operating expenses and public debt charges related to pensions and benefits for which cash disbursements are expected to be made in subsequent years but for which expenses are accrued in the current year.

All costs related to consolidated specified purpose accounts, and certain costs related to consolidated Crown corporations, are also included here, including some amounts announced in Budget 2018. The most important is Employment Insurance (EI) benefits. Most EI costs are paid directly out of the Employment Insurance Operating Account, rather than a departmental appropriation, and are therefore not specifically included in Estimates, though they are included in the budget. Similarly, expenses of consolidated Crown corporations that are funded from their own revenues are also captured here.

A final consolidation adjustment included is the reversal of expenses that are internal to government, such as when one department pays another to provide it with a service.

This column represents a forecast consistent with a group of adjustments reported in Public Accounts Volume II Section 1 Table 3a.

9. Budget expense forecast

This column represents final external expenses on an accrual basis, inclusive of all budget and off-cycle measures outlined in the budget.

4.3 Sensitivity of Fiscal Projections to Economic Shocks

Changes in economic assumptions affect the projections for revenues and expenses. The following tables illustrate the sensitivity of the budgetary balance to a number of economic shocks:

A one-year, 1-percentage-point decrease in real GDP growth driven equally by lower productivity and employment growth.

A decrease in nominal GDP growth resulting solely from a one-year, 1‑percentage-point decrease in the rate of GDP inflation (assuming that the Consumer Price Index (CPI) moves in line with GDP inflation).

A sustained 100-basis-point increase in all interest rates.

These sensitivities are generalized rules of thumb that assume any decrease in economic activity is proportional across income and expenditure components, and are meant to provide a broad illustration of the impact of economic shocks on the outlook for the budgetary balance. Actual economic shocks may have different fiscal impacts. For example, they may be concentrated in specific sectors of the economy or cause different responses in key economic variables (e.g. GDP inflation and CPI inflation may have different responses to a given shock).

A 1-percentage-point decrease in real GDP growth proportional across income and expenditure components reduces the budgetary balance by $4.8 billion in the first year, $4.5 billion in the second year and $4.9 billion in the fifth year (Table A2.13).

Tax revenues from all sources fall by a total of $4.2 billion in the first two years. Personal income tax revenues decrease as employment and the underlying tax base fall. Corporate income tax revenues fall as output and profits decrease. GST revenues decrease as a result of lower consumer spending associated with the fall in employment and personal income.

EI premium revenues increase as a result of an increase in the EI premium rate, which, under the seven-year break-even mechanism adjusts to offset the increase in benefits due to the higher number of unemployed, such that the EI Operating Account balances over time.

Expenses rise, mainly reflecting higher EI benefits (due to an increase in the number of unemployed) and higher public debt charges (reflecting a higher stock of debt due to the lower budgetary balance). This rise is partially offset by lower other program expenses (as certain programs are linked to growth in nominal GDP).

A 1-percentage-point decrease in nominal GDP growth proportional across income and expenditure components resulting solely from lower GDP inflation (assuming that the CPI moves in line with GDP inflation) lowers the budgetary balance by $2.1 billion in the first year, $2.0 billion in the second year and $1.4 billion in the fifth year (Table A2.14).

Lower prices result in lower nominal income and, as a result, personal income tax revenues decrease. As the parameters of the personal income tax system are indexed to inflation, the fiscal impact is smaller than under the real shock. For the other sources of tax revenue, the negative impacts are similar under the real and nominal GDP shocks.

EI premium revenues decrease in response to lower earnings.

Other revenues decline slightly as lower prices lead to lower revenues from the sales of goods and services.

Partly offsetting lower revenues are the declines in the cost of statutory programs that are indexed to inflation, such as elderly benefit payments, which puts downward pressure on federal program expenses. Payments under these programs are smaller if inflation is lower. In addition, other program expenses are also lower as certain programs are linked directly to growth in wages and nominal GDP.

Public debt charges decline in the first year due to lower costs associated with Real Return Bonds, then rise due to the higher stock of debt.

An increase in interest rates decreases the budgetary balance by $0.6 billion in the first year, $1.5 billion in the second year and $2.8 billion in the fifth year (Table A2.15). The decline stems entirely from increased expenses associated with public debt charges. The impact on debt charges rises through time as longer-term debt matures and is refinanced at higher rates. Moderating the overall impact is an increase in revenues associated with the increase in the rate of return on the Government’s interest-bearing assets, which are recorded as part of other revenues. The impacts of changes in interest rates on public sector pension and benefit expenses are excluded from the sensitivity analysis.

4.4 Update on Allocation of Infrastructure Investments

In Budgets 2016 and 2017, the Government laid out its plan to invest more than $180 billion in infrastructure over twelve years. This plan is underway and is supporting new infrastructure projects and economic activity across Canada. To date, over 7,800 projects, with combined investments of over $32 billion, have been approved for communities across the country. The Government is also finalizing negotiations with the provinces and territories to provide long-term funding through integrated bilateral agreements. These agreements will support new investments in public transit; green infrastructure; community, culture and recreation infrastructure; and rural and northern communities.

The funding profiles for a number of federal infrastructure programs have been updated for Budget 2018 to reflect when the Government expects to receive claims from recipients. The Government is also working to improve financial reporting and accountability under its infrastructure programs so that it is clear when projects get underway, when costs are incurred, and when federal funds flow to other levels of government.

It is expected that further adjustments to these allocations will be made over time to ensure infrastructure funding is available to other jurisdictions when it is needed.



<<< source: anx-03-en.html >>>

Annex 3

Strengthening and Modernizing Canada’s Financial Sector

Canadians expect and deserve a stable financial system that safeguards their savings and investments. They want technology to make everyday banking easier, to provide them with up to date and accurate information. At the same time, they want to know information is secure, products and services offered meet the highest standard of quality and safety, and that the fees they are paying for products and services are fair.

In this spirit, the Government proposes to advance measures that will strengthen financial sector stability, support innovation and competition in the financial sector; and bolster consumer protection.

Ensuring a Safe and Sound Financial System

Modernizing the Deposit Insurance Framework

Deposit insurance contributes to maintaining public confidence in the financial system by protecting depositors’ savings in the unlikely event that a deposit taking institution fails. The Department of Finance Canada held public consultations on changes considered to the deposit insurance framework in the fall of 2016.

Budget 2018 proposes to introduce legislative amendments to the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation Act to modernize and enhance the Canadian deposit insurance framework to ensure it continues to meet its objectives. These changes would modernize the scope of deposit insurance coverage to better reflect products currently offered in the market, address the complexity of trust deposits, help protect depositors and improve understanding of insurance coverage, and ultimately better support financial stability.

Financial Market Infrastructure Resolution

Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs) facilitate the clearing, settling, or recording of payments, securities, derivatives, and other financial transactions among participating institutions and financial brokers. They act as a hub for financial transactions. FMIs allow consumers and firms to safely and efficiently purchase goods and services, make financial investments, and transfer funds, playing a vital role in the financial sector and the economy as a whole.

Under the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act , FMIs that are considered to have the potential to pose systemic or payments system risk can be designated, and are subject to the Bank of Canada’s oversight for risk management. In a worse case scenario, the disorderly failure of a systemically important FMI could result in severe market disruption, contagion to other FMIs (and the financial system more broadly) with the potential to negatively impact the Canadian economy.

Based on collaborative work with FMIs and provincial regulators, Budget 2018 proposes to introduce legislative amendments that would implement a resolution framework for Canada’s systemically important FMIs. The objectives of the FMI resolution regime are to maintain the critical services of the FMI, promote financial stability, and reduce potential public exposure to loss.

Maintaining a Robust Currency Regime

Canadians need secure bank notes that they can use with confidence and pride.

Payment technologies continue to evolve, but cash remains a resilient payment instrument. However, large denominations facilitate illicit activities such as counterfeiting, money laundering and tax evasion.

The Government proposes to introduce legislative amendments to facilitate the maintenance of high-quality bank notes in the money supply and to provide greater clarity on the bank notes that can be used as legal tender. These changes would allow the Government to better manage the money supply so that it is safe and secure for Canadians.

Following these legislative amendments, the Government intends to initiate the process to remove the legal tender status of bank note denominations no longer issued by the Bank of Canada (i.e., $1000, $500, $25, $2 and $1). The Bank of Canada would continue to honour these bank notes and exchange them at their face value.

In addition, legislation governing the declaration of currency and monetary instruments is in place to protect Canadians and the integrity of the Canadian financial system, while supporting the efficient flow of travellers at the border. The Government will propose targeted amendments to ensure that this legislation remains up to date.

Fostering Innovation and Competition

Review of Open Banking

Financial technology (fintech) is driving change in the financial sector, and has the potential to increase innovation and competition, providing Canadians with more affordable and useful services, and increasing financial inclusion as specific customers or markets (e.g. small and medium sized businesses) are better served.

Within this overall context, a number of international jurisdictions are implementing open banking platforms. At its core, open banking is about empowering consumers to share their financial data between their financial institution and other third party providers through secure data sharing platforms. This in turn enables financial service providers to offer more tailored products and services, on a more competitive and innovative basis. Open banking also has the potential to provide consumers with greater transparency on the products and services offered by financial institutions, thus allowing them to make more informed decisions, and makes it easier for consumers to move and manage their money.

Recognizing these potential benefits, the Government proposes to undertake a review of the merits of open banking in order to assess whether open banking would deliver positive results for Canadians with the highest regard for consumer privacy, data security and financial stability.

Supporting an Innovative Retail Payments System

Innovative, well-functioning retail payments systems allow consumers and businesses to transfer payments smoothly and efficiently. The Government is undertaking consultations with stakeholders, including provinces and territories, on a proposed oversight framework that aims to ensure that retail payment services continue to be reliable and safe for Canadians and the providers of such services can continue to develop faster, cheaper and more convenient methods of payments.

The framework would strengthen the reliability of the payment system for consumers when they purchase goods and services or transfer money, and foster innovation in the payments sector.

Budget 2018 announces the Government’s intention to introduce legislative amendments to implement a new framework for the oversight of retail payments following the conclusion of consultations. In the coming months, the Government also proposes to launch a review of the Canadian Payments Act to ensure that Payments Canada is well positioned to continue to fulfill its public policy objectives of ensuring the efficiency, safety and soundness of its systems. The review will include consultations with stakeholders, including provinces and territories.

Modernizing the Financial Sector Framework

To ensure the financial sector keeps pace with global developments and the changing needs of businesses and consumers, Budget 2016 announced consultations with stakeholders as part of a financial sector legislative review. Stakeholders indicated that the financial sector legislative framework is functioning well, but called for targeted updates to adapt to innovations and sectoral developments.

Budget 2018 proposes to introduce legislative amendments to implement targeted proposals from the review. Priority amendments would adapt the legislative framework and facilitate greater partnering in response to the emergence of financial technology (fintech). Proposed changes would include:

greater flexibility for financial institutions to undertake and leverage broader fintech activities that enable the delivery of financial services in new and innovative ways;

permitting life and health insurance companies to make long-term and predictable investments in infrastructure;

providing prudentially regulated deposit-taking institutions, such as credit unions, flexibility to use generic bank terms, subject to disclosure; and,

renewing the sunset date in the federal financial institutions statutes.

Additional legislative amendments will be proposed to position the federal framework for the future. These include modernizing financial institutions’ corporate governance, providing for the continued clarity and prudential integrity of federal financial sector legislation, as well as targeted updates to streamline the federal framework and to ensure that it continues to support a stable, competitive and resilient financial sector.

To further enhance Canada’s private pension policy framework, the Government will shortly launch public consultations on a regime to address unclaimed pension balances. Following the consultations, the Government may introduce legislative and regulatory amendments.

Enhancing Consumer Protection in Banking

Canadians expect strong consumer protection standards in their dealings with banks. The Government takes the protection of financial consumers very seriously and intends to ensure that all Canadians benefit from strong consumer protection standards.

Over the last year the Government has undertaken a comprehensive review of the consumer protection framework. Budget 2018 proposes to introduce legislation that would strengthen the Financial Consumer Agency of Canada’s tools and mandate and continue to advance consumers’ rights and interests when dealing with their banks. New legislation will be developed through targeted consultations with stakeholders, including provinces and territories.

Treasury Management

The Exchange Fund Account is mainly composed of liquid foreign currency assets, and represents the largest component of Canada’s official international reserves. The Government proposes to introduce legislative amendments to support the administration of the exchange fund account and ensure continuity of related Bank of Canada authorities. Additionally, in January 2019, new International Financial Reporting Standards will come into effect that impact how variety of leases are reported, measured, presented and disclosed. Accordingly, the Government intends to introduce legislative amendments to ensure that Crown corporations are able to implement these new standards without exceeding their statutory authorities or borrowing limits.

Debt Management Strategy for 2018–19

Introduction

The Debt Management Strategy sets out the Government of Canada's objectives, strategy and borrowing plans for its domestic debt program and the management of its official international reserves. Borrowing activities support the ongoing refinancing of government debt coming to maturity, the execution of the budget plan and the financial operations of the Government. The Debt Management Strategy for 2018–19 reflects Budget 2018 fiscal projections.

The Financial Administration Act requires that the Government table in Parliament, prior to the start of the fiscal year, a report on the anticipated borrowing to be undertaken in the year ahead, including the purposes for which the money will be borrowed. The Debt Management Strategy fulfills this requirement.

Outlook for Government of Canada Debt

The Government of Canada continues to receive triple-A credit ratings, with a stable outlook, from major rating agencies that evaluate its financial position.

Those rating agencies indicate that Canada's triple-A credit ratings are supported by strong political institutions, economic resilience and economic diversity, well-regulated financial markets, monetary and fiscal flexibility, as well as the country’s effective, stable and predictable policy-making.

Canada’s general government gross debt and net debt positions also remain favourable. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Canada’s net debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio is the lowest in the Group of Seven (G7), reflecting significant holdings of financial assets.

Planned Borrowing Activities for 2018–19

Borrowing Authority

The Minister of Finance is required to seek Parliamentary approval to borrow on behalf of Her Majesty in Right of Canada (i.e., the Government). The authority to manage public debt flows from the Borrowing Authority Act and Part IV of the Financial Administration Act , which together allow the Minister of Finance to borrow money up to a maximum amount as approved by Parliament.

Parliament granted its approval via the Borrowing Authority Act , which came into force on November 23, 2017. With that Act, Parliament authorized a maximum stock of outstanding government and Crown corporation market debt of $1,168 billion. The Government does not expect to exceed this limit in 2018–19 and therefore is not required to seek renewed Parliamentary approval. Outstanding government and Crown corporation market debt is projected to reach $1,066 billion in 2018–19, including $755 billion in projected year-end government market debt and an anticipated Crown corporation market debt stock of approximately $311 billion.

The projected sources and uses of borrowings are presented in Table A3.1. Actual borrowings and uses of funds for the upcoming fiscal year compared with the projections will be reported in the Debt Management Report for 2018–19 , and detailed information on outcomes will be provided in the Public Accounts of Canada 2019 .

Sources of Borrowings

The aggregate principal amount of money to be borrowed by the Government in 2018–19 is projected to be $258 billion. All borrowing will be sourced from domestic and foreign wholesale markets (Table A3.1).

Use of Borrowings

The Government’s borrowing needs are driven by the Government’s projected financial requirements, the refinancing of maturing debt and projected changes in the Government’s cash balances.

Financial requirements measure the net cash flow attributed to the Government’s budgetary and non-budgetary transactions. 1 If the Government has a net cash inflow (financial source), it can use the cash to decrease the total debt stock. However, as is currently the case, if a net cash outflow (financial requirement) is projected, the Government must meet that requirement by increasing the total debt stock or by drawing down cash balances.

In 2018–19, the financial requirement is projected to be approximately $35 billion, the refinancing of maturing debt is projected to be $227 billion, and the Government’s cash balances are not projected to change as new borrowings are expected to meet all borrowing requirements.

Actual borrowings for the year may differ due to uncertainty associated with economic and fiscal projections, the timing of cash transactions, and other factors such as changes in foreign reserve needs and Crown corporation borrowings. To adjust for unexpected changes in financial requirements, debt issuance can be altered during the year—typically through changes in the bi‑weekly treasury bill issuance and through slight changes in cash balances for smaller adjustments. It should be noted that the $3 billion budgetary risk adjustment included in the budgetary deficit for prudent fiscal planning purposes is subtracted from the calculation of borrowing needs to increase the forecast accuracy.

Debt Management Strategy for 2018–19

Objectives

The fundamental objectives of debt management are to raise stable and low-cost funding to meet the financial needs of the Government of Canada and to maintain a well-functioning market for Government of Canada securities. Achieving stable, low-cost funding involves striking a balance between the cost and risk associated with the debt structure as funding needs change and market conditions vary. Having access to a well-functioning government securities market ensures that funds can be raised efficiently over time to meet the Government’s needs. Moreover, to support a liquid and well-functioning market for Government of Canada securities, the Government strives to promote transparency and consistency.

Debt Structure Planning

The Debt Management Strategy for 2018–19 is informed by an analysis of several debt structures over a wide range of economic and interest rate scenarios and forecasts over a medium-term horizon.

The Government seeks to strike a balance between keeping funding costs low and mitigating risks, as measured by metrics such as debt rollover and the variation in annual debt-service charges.

Market Consultations

As in previous years, market participants were consulted as part of the process of developing the debt management strategy .

Market participants indicated that markets for Government of Canada bonds and treasury bills have, for the most part, functioned well throughout the past year. Further details on the views expressed during consultations for the Debt Management Strategy for 2018–19 can be found on the Bank of Canada’s website .

Composition of Market Debt

The stock of total market debt is projected to reach $755 billion by the end of 2018–19 (Table A3.2).

Over the next decade, the share of domestic market debt outstanding with original terms to maturity of 10 years or more is projected to stay at about the current level (i.e., around 40 per cent). Additionally, the average term to maturity of domestic market debt is projected to remain relatively stable at around 5.5 to 6.5 years over the medium term.

The Government of Canada continues to follow prudent debt management practices compared to global peers. Canada’s level of federal market debt as a proportion of GDP is the lowest among G7 countries. Despite this, Canada has continued to prudently issue debt across different maturity sectors and has maintained a weighted average term to maturity similar to that of most G7 countries.

2018–19 Treasury Bill Program

Borrowing requirements in 2017–18 were lower than projected in Budget 2017 due to a convergence of factors, including increased tax revenues from higher-than-projected economic activity throughout 2017–18. Accordingly, the size of bi-weekly treasury bill auctions declined in response to lower financial requirements, as treasury bills are typically used as the main shock absorber to adjust cash flows according to the evolution and timing of the Government’s borrowing needs. Reflecting this, the stock of treasury bills is projected to decline to $125 billion by the end of 2017–18, $6 billion less than projected in Budget 2017.

In response to feedback from market participants, adjustments are being made in 2018–19 to increase the projected year-end stock of treasury bills. This is consistent with the medium-term objective of maintaining a treasury bill stock that is large enough to support a liquid and well-functioning market for Canadian federal government treasury bills, while also managing debt rollover risk.

Bi-weekly issuance of 3-, 6- and 12-month maturities will be continued in 2018–19, with bi-weekly auction sizes projected to be largely in the $8 billion to $14 billion range. Cash management bills (i.e., short-dated treasury bills) help manage government cash requirements in an efficient manner. These instruments will also continue to be used in 2018–19.

2018–19 Bond Program

In 2018–19, gross bond issuance is projected to be around $115 billion (Table A3.3). This approach balances liquidity requirements in both the treasury bill and core benchmark bond sectors necessary to promote market well-functioning, while also satisfying the Government’s objective of achieving stable, low-cost funding.

Maturity Date Cycles and Benchmark Bond Target Range Sizes

For 2018–19, slight decreases in benchmark bond target ranges are planned relative to fiscal year 2017–18 (Table A3.4).

Bond Auction Schedule

In 2018–19, there will be quarterly auctions of 2-, 3-, 5- and 10-year bonds, and 30-year Real Return Bonds. Some of these bonds may be issued multiple times per quarter. The number of planned auctions in 2018–19 for each bond sector is shown in Table A3.5. The actual number of auctions that occur may be different than the planned number of auctions due to unexpected changes in borrowing requirements.

The dates of each auction will continue to be announced through the Quarterly Bond Schedule that is published on the Bank of Canada’s website prior to the start of each quarter.

Ultra-Long Bond Issuance

The Government will continue to issue ultra-long bonds subject to favourable market conditions and with consideration for the Government’s debt strategy objective of achieving stable, low-cost funding. Potential ultra-long bond issuance dates included in the Quarterly Bond Schedule published on the Bank of Canada’s website would represent a possibility but not a commitment to hold an ultra-long bond auction. An auction would be held only if a Call for Tenders is released confirming the date and size of the auction, and would be posted on the Bank of Canada’s website in the preceding week. Alternatively, a market notice would be released in the preceding week in lieu of a Call for Tenders should the Government decide not to issue an ultra-long bond on the listed date.

Bond Buyback Programs

The Government plans to continue conducting regular bond buybacks on a switch basis and cash management bond buybacks.

Two bond buyback operations on a switch basis are planned for 2018–19. These operations would occur for bonds that were originally issued with terms to maturity of 30 years. The dates of each operation will continue to be announced through the Quarterly Bond Schedule that is published on the Bank of Canada’s website prior to the start of each quarter.

The cash management bond buyback program helps to manage government cash requirements by reducing large bond maturities. Weekly cash management bond buyback operations will be continued in 2018–19. A pilot project to increase the flexibility in the maximum repurchase amount was introduced in January 2017 and will remain in place until further notice.

Management of Canada’s Official International Reserves

The Exchange Fund Account (EFA), which is held in the name of the Minister of Finance, represents the largest component of Canada’s official international reserves. It is a portfolio of Canada’s liquid foreign exchange reserves and special drawing rights (SDRs) 2 used to aid in the control and protection of the external value of the Canadian dollar and to provide a source of liquidity to the Government. In addition to the EFA, Canada’s official international reserves include Canada’s reserve position held at the IMF.

The Government borrows to invest in liquid reserves, which are maintained at a level at or above 3 per cent of nominal GDP. Funding requirements for 2018–19 are estimated to be around US$10 billion, but may vary as a result of movements in foreign interest rates and exchange rates.

The mix of funding sources used to finance the liquid reserves in 2018–19 will depend on a number of considerations, including relative cost, market conditions and the objective of maintaining a prudent foreign-currency-denominated debt maturity structure. Potential funding sources include a short-term US-dollar paper program (Canada bills), medium-term notes, cross-currency swaps involving the exchange of Canadian dollars for foreign currency to acquire liquid reserves, and the issuance of global bonds.

Further information on foreign currency funding and the foreign reserve assets is available in the Report on the Management of Canada’s Official International Reserves and in The Fiscal Monitor .

Cash Management

The core objective of cash management is to ensure the Government has sufficient cash available at all times to meet its operating requirements.

Cash consists of moneys on deposit with the Bank of Canada, chartered banks and other financial institutions. Cash with the Bank of Canada includes operational balances and balances held for prudential liquidity. Cash balances are projected to remain stable at $37 billion at the end of the fiscal year. Periodic updates on the liquidity position are available in The Fiscal Monitor .

Prudential Liquidity

The Government holds liquid financial assets in the form of domestic cash deposits and foreign exchange reserves to safeguard its ability to meet payment obligations in situations where normal access to funding markets may be disrupted or delayed. The Government’s overall liquidity levels cover at least one month of net projected cash flows, including coupon payments and debt refinancing needs.

1 Budgetary transactions include government revenues and expenses. Non-budgetary transactions include changes in federal employee pension accounts; changes in non-financial assets; investing activities through loans, investments and advances; and changes in other financial assets, including foreign exchange activities.

2 SDRs are international reserve assets created by the IMF whose value is based on a basket of international currencies.



<<< source: toc-tdm-en_2.html >>>

Tax Measures: Supplementary Information

Table of Contents

Overview

Personal Income Tax Measures

Canada Workers Benefit

Medical Expense Tax Credit – Eligible Expenditures

Registered Disability Savings Plan – Qualifying Plan Holders

Deductibility of Employee Contributions to the Enhanced Portion of the Quebec Pension Plan

Child Benefits

Charities – Miscellaneous Technical Issues

Mineral Exploration Tax Credit for Flow-Through Share Investors

Reporting Requirements for Trusts

Business Income Tax Measures

Passive Investment Income

Tax Support for Clean Energy

Artificial Losses Using Equity-Based Financial Arrangements

Stop-Loss Rule on Share Repurchase Transactions

At-Risk Rules for Tiered Partnerships

Health and Welfare Trusts

International Tax Measures

Cross-Border Surplus Stripping using Partnerships and Trusts

Foreign Affiliates

Reassessment Period – Requirements for Information and Compliance Orders

Reassessment Period – Non-Resident Non-Arm's Length Persons

Sharing Information for Criminal Matters

Sales and Excise Tax Measures

GST/HST and Investment Limited Partnerships

Tobacco Taxation

Cannabis Taxation

Proposed Consultations on Tax Measures

Consultations on the GST/HST Holding Corporation Rules

Previously Announced Measures

Notices of Ways and Means Motions

Notice of Ways and Means Motion to amend the Income Tax Act and Other Related Legislation

Notice of Ways and Means Motion to amend the Excise Tax Act

Notice of Ways and Means Motion to amend the Excise Act, 2001 and Other Related Legislation

Draft Amendments to Various GST/HST Regulations



<<< source: overview-apercu-en.html >>>

Introduction

Less than three years ago, with very low growth and stubbornly high unemployment, the Government chose to invest in strengthening the middle class and growing our economy rather than implement austerity policies including spending cuts or tax increases.

While austerity can come from fiscal necessity, it should not turn into a rigid ideology about deficits that sees any investment as bad spending. That approach has failed around the world, and in Canada.

Canadians understand that a country can’t cut its way to prosperity. They have the confidence to invest in the future, and the Government has the ability to do so. Canada’s strong fiscal fundamentals—anchored by a low and consistently declining debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio—means that Canada can make the investments that will strengthen and grow the middle class, and lay a more solid foundation for our children’s future.

The result? Instead of continued low growth from unneeded austerity, Canada now has the fastest growing economy in the Group of Seven (G7), and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has argued that Canada’s economic policies should “go viral.” The Government’s investments in people and in the communities they call home are delivering greater opportunities for the middle class, and for all Canadians. Targeted investments, combined with the hard work of Canadians, have helped create good, well-paying jobs—and will continue to strengthen the economy over the long term.

Measures like the middle class tax cut and the new Canada Child Benefit mean that Canadian families now have more money to save, invest and spend in their communities. Historic investments in public transit, green infrastructure and social infrastructure—such as early learning and child care and affordable housing—combined with investments in an ambitious Innovation and Skills Plan, will ensure that all Canadians have the support they need to compete and succeed.

Budget 2018 builds on this plan of investment over austerity, while maintaining a clear focus on fiscal responsibility and continuously improving fiscal results.

Canadian Economic Context

The Government’s plan to invest in people, in communities and in the economy has put more money in the pockets of Canadians, has helped create more well-paying jobs and is giving Canadians greater confidence in their future.

Since November 2015, Canadians have created almost 600,000 new jobs and the unemployment rate has fallen from 7.1 per cent to 5.9 per cent—close to its lowest level in over four decades. The Canadian economy has been remarkably strong, growing at a pace well above that of all other G7 countries since mid-2016 (Chart 1).

[Chart 1 - Text version]

Strong output growth and a robust labour market—along with the measures that the Government has put in place to support the middle class over the past two years—are driving higher levels of Canadian consumer and business confidence and supporting wage growth (Chart 2). This positive sentiment and higher earnings are translating into solid growth in household spending and a recovery in business investment, which should continue to support economic growth.

[Chart 2 - Text version]

Going forward, growth is expected to remain robust—however, upside and downside risks remain which could affect the economic outlook. In particular, global growth could surprise on the upside, and elevated confidence in Canada could continue to boost household spending here at home. However, uncertainty about the future of the North American Free Trade Agreement, tighter financial conditions and ongoing market volatility could weigh on Canadian growth prospects.

“If you are looking for a country that has the diversity, the resilience, the positivity and the confidence that will not just manage this change but take advantage of it, there has never been a better time to look to Canada.”

Highly skilled, inclusive, diverse, mobile labour force Most educated talent pool in the Organisation for Economic Co operation and Development (OECD)—over 55 per cent of the population aged 25-64 has a post-secondary degree Best availability of skilled labour in the G20 (International Institute for Management Development (IMD) World Competitiveness Center) Highest workforce-ready immigration inflows in the G7 Budget 2018: plan to increase labour force participation of women, new Canadians and Indigenous Peoples

World-class science, research and innovation ecosystem Leading the G20 in research and development (R&D) spending in higher education as a share of GDP (OECD) One of the best R&D tax incentives in the G7 Budget 2018: largest investment in fundamental research ($3 billion) in Canadian history

Rich and diverse natural environment and resources Exceptional endowment of energy and mineral resources Responsible and predictable climate change policies New, more predictable environmental assessment process Budget 2018: $1.3 billion in investment to protect Canada’s nature legacy

Sound regulatory, financial and trade frameworks Easiest place to start a business in the G20 (World Bank) Network of free trade agreements covering over half of global economic activity Promotion of investment and attraction of leading global firms through the new Invest in Canada Hub One of the world’s soundest banking systems—ranked first in the G7 (World Economic Forum)

Strong, stable and predictable public institutions Growth-enhancing, responsible fiscal policy Lowest net public debt as a share of GDP in the G7 Successful inflation-targeting regime

Budget 2018 Investments

The Government continues to strengthen the middle class and make investments to support Canada’s long-term economic growth. Challenges posed by population aging, global climate change and rapid technological innovation underscore the importance of strong leadership and a forward-looking approach to strengthen growth for the middle class.

Budget 2018 continues the Government’s plan to invest in the middle class and puts a special focus on ensuring that all Canadians have the skills and opportunities they need to participate fully and equally in our economy. Budget 2018 also makes investments to put Canada at the forefront of scientific and technological innovation, protect Canada’s natural heritage and create opportunities for Indigenous people.

Maintaining a Downward Deficit Track

Growth-generating investments in people, in communities and in the economy are balanced by sound fiscal management. The Budget 2018 fiscal track is broadly unchanged from the 2017 Fall Economic Statement and continues to show a decline in the federal debt-to-GDP ratio, along with steady improvements in the Government’s annual budgetary balance (Charts 3 and 4).

The federal debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to decline gradually over the forecast horizon, reaching 28.4 per cent in 2022–23. According to the IMF, Canada’s net debt-to-GDP ratio is by far the lowest among G7 countries and less than half the G7 average (Chart 3).

[Chart 3 - Text version]

The Government will maintain this downward deficit and debt ratio track—preserving Canada’s low-debt advantage for current and future generations. Low debt supports economic growth and intergenerational equity by keeping interest costs low and preserving flexibility to face future challenges and shocks.

[Chart 4 - Text version]

A detailed overview of the economic and fiscal outlook is included in Annex 2.

Continued Economic Strength Would Accelerate Deficit Reduction

The fiscal projections presented in this budgetare based on an average of the December 2017 private sector economic outlook survey, and also reflect upside and downside risks, noted above, identified through ongoing engagement with survey participants. Economists surveyed offered a wide range of views regarding future economic growth and, therefore, the path of nominal GDP (the broadest measure of the tax base). Changes in economic growth assumptions can have large impacts on the budgetary balance and debt-to-GDP profile over an extended projection horizon.

For example, if the Government based current fiscal projections on the average of the top four forecasts for nominal GDP growth, the budgetary balance would improve by $3.0 billion per year on average, and the federal debt-to-GDP ratio would fall by a further 1.1 percentage points than projected by 2022–23 (Chart 5).

[Chart 5 - Text version]

Conversely, basing fiscal projections on the average of the bottom four individual forecasts for nominal GDP growth, the budgetary balance would worsen by $3.5 billion per year on average, and the federal debt-to-GDP ratio would still decline, but be 1.2 percentage points higher than projected in 2022–23



<<< source: chap-01-txt-en.html >>>

Chapter 1 - Growth - Text Version

Chart 1.1 - Enhancing the Canada Workers Benefit, 2019

Chart 1.2 - CWB Enhancement for Unattached Workers, 2019

The chart shows how an unattached individual’s entitlement to the proposed Canada Workers Benefit (CWB) would depend on that individual’s earnings and net income. The CWB would provide a refundable tax credit of 26 per cent of each dollar of earned income in excess of $3,000, reaching a maximum benefit of $1,355 at earned income of $8,212. Once the individual’s net income exceeds $12,820, the benefit would be reduced at a rate of 12 per cent of each additional dollar, until the benefit is fully phased out at net income of $24,111.

The chart also illustrates how the proposed CWB compares to the benefit that would otherwise be received taking into account the enhancement to the Working Income Tax Benefit (WITB) in 2019 associated with the Canada Pension Plan enhancement. Under that design, the WITB would provide a refundable tax credit of 26 per cent of each dollar of earned income in excess of $3,000, reaching a maximum benefit of $1,192 at earned income of $7,585. Once the individual’s net income exceeds $12,220, the benefit would be reduced at a rate of 14 per cent of each additional dollar, until the benefit is fully phased out at net income of $20,734.

Finally, the chart illustrates how the proposed CWB compares to the benefit that would otherwise be received in the absence of the enhancement to the WITB associated with the Canada Pension Plan enhancement. Under that design, the WITB would provide a refundable tax credit of 25 per cent of each dollar of earned income in excess of $3,000, reaching a maximum benefit of $1,080 at earned income of $7,320. Once the individual’s net income exceeds $12,220, the benefit would be reduced at a rate of 15 per cent of each additional dollar, until the benefit is fully phased out at net income of $19,420.

Chart 1.3 - CWB Enhancement for Couples and Single Parents, 2019

The chart shows how a couple’s or a single parent’s entitlement to the proposed Canada Workers Benefit (CWB) would depend on that family’s earnings and net income. The CWB would provide a refundable tax credit of 26 per cent of each dollar of earned income in excess of $3,000, reaching a maximum benefit of $2,335 at earned income of $11,981. Once the family’s net income exceeds $17,025, the benefit would be reduced at a rate of 12 per cent of each additional dollar, until the benefit is fully phased out at family net income of $36,483.

The chart also illustrates how the proposed CWB compares to the benefit that would otherwise be received taking into account the enhancement to the Working Income Tax Benefit (WITB) in 2019 associated with the Canada Pension Plan enhancement. Under that design, the WITB would provide a refundable tax credit of 26 per cent of each dollar of earned income in excess of $3,000, reaching a maximum benefit of $2,165 at earned income of $11,327. Once the family’s net income exceeds $16,875, the benefit would be reduced at a rate of 14 per cent of each additional dollar, until the benefit is fully phased out at net income of $32,339.

Finally, the chart illustrates how the proposed CWB compares to the benefit that would otherwise be received in the absence of the enhancement to the WITB associated with the Canada Pension Plan enhancement. Under that design, the WITB would provide a refundable tax credit of 25 per cent of each dollar of earned income in excess of $3,000, reaching a maximum benefit of $1,961 at earned income of $10,844. Once the family’s net income exceeds $16,875, the benefit would be reduced at a rate of 15 per cent of each additional dollar, until the benefit is fully phased out at net income of $29,948.

Chart 1.4 - Comparison of Canada Child Benefit and Old Child Benefit System, 2017–18

Chart 1.5 - Annual GIS Benefits for Single Seniors, 2017

Chart 1.6 - Women Account for the Vast Majority of New EI Parental Claims and of the Total Amount Paid in EI Parental Benefits

Chart 1.7 - Canada's Free Trade Network

Chart 1.8 - Reduction in the Small Business Deduction Limit Based on Passive Investment Income

Figure 1.1 - Canada's National Housing Strategy Over $40-Billion, 10-Year Investment

Canada’s National Housing Strategy is a more than $40 billion dollar, 10-year investment in affordable housing.

Over the next decade, the National Housing Strategy will:

Create more than 100,000 new housing units;

Protect 385,000 community housing units and create 50,000 more;

Remove 530,000 households from housing need;

Support 300,000 households with a Canada Housing Benefit;

Reduce chronic homelessness by 50 per cent; and,

Repair and renew 300,000 existing housing units.

Figure 1.2 - EI Parental Sharing Benefit

Employment Insurance parental benefits allows parents to take the time they need to care for their children.

To support equal parenting and the flexibility for earlier returns to work, the Government introduces a new Employment Parental Sharing Benefit which will be available when both parents agree to share parental leave.

Currently, under the standard parental benefit option of 35 weeks paid at 55 per cent of average weekly earnings:

Either parent may take up to 35 weeks;

The other parent may take the remainder of the 35 total weeks available;

Parents can share the 35 total weeks in various combinations. For example, one parent could choose to access 20 weeks, and the other 15 weeks; or one parent could choose to access 10 weeks, and the other 25 weeks.

If a couple decides that one parent takes 35 weeks, there are no week available to the other parent.

In comparison, with the new Employment Insurance Parental Sharing Benefit:

Either parent may take up to 35 weeks;

The other parent may take the remainder of the 40 total weeks available;

Parents can share the 40 total weeks in various combinations. For example, parents could choose to split the parental benefits equally and each access 20 weeks; or one parent could choose to access 15 weeks, and the other 25 weeks.

A minimum of 5 weeks is available for each parent.

Equivalent rules would apply to Employment Insurance extended parental benefits with 61 weeks as the limit for one parent, and up to 69 weeks available in total (paid at 33% of average weekly earnings).

Figure 1.3 - Preparing Canada’s Labour Force for the Skills of Tomorrow

A graphic outlining an initiative which will include two elements. The first element is the Skills Innovation Council which will include up to 15 expert independent members who report publicly through the Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Labour. The second element is the Skills Lab which is an autonomous research lab to pursue projects to prototype, test and disseminate evidence on skills development and measurement.



<<< source: chap-02-txt-en.html >>>

Chapter 2 - Progress - Text Version

Figure 2.1: Research is the Engine That Powers an Innovative Economy

A flowchart showing how research activities supported through Budget 2018 help to create a brighter future for Canadians. Information is grouped into four categories. These are: the results of activities undertaken in Budget 2018, attracts, enables, and creates. Each has a number of items associated with it.

Activities undertaken through Budget 2018

Better equipment for researchers

More collaboration between Canadians and international partners

More researchers supported

Attracts

Skilled and talented people

New investment to fuel businesses and job creation

Global investors

Enables

Entrepreneurs to innovate

Products and services for Canadians

Solutions to society’s challenges

Creates

Canadian companies at a global scale

More prosperity for Canadians

Economically sustainable communities

Figure 2.2: Canada Is a Beacon to Researchers Around the World

A circular diagram showing the factors that attract researchers to Canada making Canada a beacon to researchers from around the world. The diagram is composed of an inner and outer circle. The outer circle lists what is being drawn to Canada by the four categories listed in the inner circle.

Listed in the outer circle

Best and brightest students

Top-tier researchers

Business research and development investment

Listed in the inner circle

Funding for Researchers

First in G7 for overall spending in higher-education research as a share of GDP

Historical increase in Budget 2018

Investing in early-career researchers

Welcoming Environment

Open immigration policy

Among most liveable countries in the world

Multicultural

Clean and friendly cities

A great place to invest, work and live

Modern Vision

Collaborative research across disciplines and borders

Diversity in research and ideas

Capital and Equipment

Canada Foundation for Innovation enabled ongoing investments in cutting-edge research and infrastructure

Modern post-secondary institution infrastructure

Figure 2.3: Simplifying Access to Innovation Programs

Illustration of Innovation Canada as the single-point of entry to the Government’s four flagship innovation support “platforms” and how they are located within the business support landscape along three dimensions of support. These “platforms” are the Industrial Research Assistance Program, the Strategic Innovation Fund, the regional development agencies, and the Trade Commissioner Service.

Areas of business support overlap somewhat between the Strategic Innovation Fund, the Industrial Research Assistance Program, and the regional development agencies.

Technology Adoption

The first “platform” supporting technology adoption projects is the regional development agencies for project values predominately up to $10 million, with some greater. The Industrial Research Assistance Program also provides some support for technology adoption projects up to a maximum of $10 million. The Strategic Innovation Fund, predominately supports technology adoption projects greater than $10 million.

Research and Development

The first “platform” supporting research and development projects is the Industrial Research Assistance Program for project values up to a maximum of $10 million. The regional development agencies also provide some support for research and development projects. The Strategic Innovation Fund predominately supports research and development projects greater than $10 million.

Export Services are supported by the Trade Commissioner Service.

Figure 2.4: Simplified Program Suite

An illustration of the simplification of the business innovation program suite showing the number of business innovation programs being reduced by up to two‑thirds. The is illustrated in the left-hand panel through 92 scattered squares, captioned with “92”, representing the current number of business innovation programs, with an arrow pointing to the right‑hand panel of the image, showing fewer and more neatly organized squares, captioned by “up to a two‑thirds reduction in programs”.

Figure 2.5: Women Entrepreneurship Strategy

The Government’s new Women Entrepreneurship Strategy takes a comprehensive approach and addresses women-led companies’ needs throughout their growth cycle.

Helping women-owned businesses grow

Business skills, mentorship, networking, procurement opportunities

Improving access to federal business innovation programming

A universal goal to improve participation of underrepresented groups in the innovation economy

Increasing access to capital

Growth and export financing, venture capital

Enhancing data and knowledge

Improved data, knowledge, best practices



<<< source: chap-04-txt-en.html >>>

Chapter 4 - Advancement - Text Version

Chart 4.1: New International Assistance Envelope Funding Structure – 2018–19

Figure 4.1: Canada’s Feminist International Assistance Policy

Canada’s Feminist International Assistance Policy

Core Action Area 1: Gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls

Action Area 2: Human dignity

Action Area 3: Growth that works for everyone

Action Area 4: Environment and climate action

Action Area 5: Inclusive governance

Action Area 6: Peace and security

Figure 4.2: The Policy Shifts the Priorities of Canada’s

The Feminist International Assistance Policy shifts the priorities of Canada’s development assistance as follows:

First, a previous focus on equality between men and women and basic gender-based analysis with marginal programing investments, will become a focus on gender equality & the empowerment of women & girls by championing gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, including by providing $150 million in support of the Women’s Voice and Leadership initiative to address barriers to resources and opportunities.

In 2014/15, only 2.4% of bilateral international assistance was targeted on gender, with 68.5% having gender integrated components, and 29.1% not having any gender targeting or integration. By 2021/22, this will shift to 15% of bilateral international assistance being targeted on gender, 80%% having gender integrated components, and only 5% not having any gender targeting or integration.

Second, a previous focus on maternal, newborn & child health with selective and focused commitments on health systems, nutrition and childhood diseases, will become a focus on comprehensive sexual, reproductive health & rights, with full spectrum health programming and a commitment of $650 million over 3 years which will double funding to sexual and reproductive health and rights. Sexual, reproductive health & rights investments will increase from $200 million in 2014/15 to $400 million by 2021/22.

Finally, a previous focus on environmental sustainability, with limited policies, plans and programs linked largely to environmental conservation will become a focus on the environment & climate change. addressing climate change and mitigating its impacts alongside opportunities for women in building climate resilience, e.g. clean energy sector, with a commitment of $2.65 billion.

Figure 4.3: Sustainable Development Goals

The 17 Sustainable Development Goals:

No poverty

Zero hunger

Good health and well-being

Quality education

Gender equality

Clean water and sanitation

Affordable and clean energy

Decent work and economic growth

Industry, innovation and infrastructure

Reduced inequalities

Sustainable cities and communities

Responsible consumption and production

Climate action

Life below water

Life on land

Peace, justice and strong institutions

Partnerships for the goals

Figure 4.4: Opioid-Related Deaths in Canada, 2016



<<< source: chap-05-txt-en.html >>>

Budget 2018: Chapter 5 - Equality - Text Version

Chart 5.1

Chart 5.2

Chart 5.3

Chart 5.4

Chart 5.5

Chart 5.6

Chart 5.7

Chart 5.8

Chart 5.9

Chart 5.10a

Chart 5.10b

Figure 5.1

Two statistics are presented. The first shows that the share of women relative to men in post-secondary qualifications is 52%. A woman wearing a graduation cap is pictured. The second shows that the share of women relative to men in continuing Red Seal apprentices (excluding female-dominated trades, i.e. hairstylist, baker and cook) is 4%. A woman wearing a construction hat is pictured.

Figure 5.2

Figure 5.3

Two comparisons of the gender wage gap. The first is the gender wage gap in terms of annual earnings, which shows that women earned 31% less than men. The second is the gender wage gap in terms of hourly wages, which shows that women earned 12% less than men.

Note: The gender wage gap in hourly wages is calculated for full-time employees. Source: Canadian Income Survey; Labour Force Survey, Statistics Canada; Department of Finance Canada calculations.

Figure 5.4

Figure 5.5

Three statistics are presented on gender-based violence. The first shows that 4 out of 10 violent crimes reported to the police by women involved an intimate partner. The second shows that less than 1 in 10 sexual assault victims report the crime to the police. The third shows that nearly 1 in 3 women have experienced some form of sexual harassment in the workplace.

Sources: Statistics Canada, General Social Survey; Employment and Social Development Canada.

Figure 5.6

Figure 5.7

Figure 5.8

All SMEs and Exporting SMEs by Gender

Women entrepreneurs in Canada are underrepresented: women-owned SMEs only represent 16% of all SMEs in Canada, and 11% of all exporters.

Sources: Survey on Financing and Growth of Small and Medium Enterprises , 2014; office of the Chief Economist, Global Affairs Canada.

Figure 5.9

Disparities between Indigenous and non-Indigenous people are significant. The life expectancy of First Nations and Inuit men and women is lower than non-Indigenous men and women.

On average, Inuit men and women have the lowest life expectancy, with Inuit men living until 71 years of age and Inuit women living until 74 years of age. On average, First Nations men live until 76 years of age and First Nations women life until 79 years of age. On average, non-Indigenous men live until 81 years of age and non-Indigenous women live until 85 years of age.

On average, Inuit and First Nations living on reserve, First Nations living off reserve and Métis have lower attainment of high-school or higher than non-Indigenous populations aged 18 to 24. More specifically, among the 18 to 24 age population:

44% of Inuit achieve high school or higher

44% of First Nations on reserve achieve high school or higher

70% of First Nations off reserve achieve high school or higher

79% of Métis achieve high school or higher

88% of non-Indigenous people achieve high school or higher

Compared to non-Indigenous populations, Inuit and First Nations living on reserve, First Nations living off reserve and Métis are more likely to live in households that need major repairs. More specifically:

40% of First Nations on reserve live in a household needing major repairs

22% of First Nations off reserve live in a household needing major repairs

12% of Inuit live in a household needing major repairs

10% of Métis live in a household needing major repairs

6% of non-Indigenous people live in a household needing major repairs

Figure 5.9.4: Rates of Tuberculosis

Rates of tuberculosis are 270 times higher for Inuit than the rate in the Canadian-born, non-Indigenous population.

Figure 5.10

Figure 5.11

Figure 5.12



<<< source: anx-01-txt-en.html >>>

Annex 1: Economic and Fiscal Outlook - Text Version

Chart A1.1

Chart A1.2

Chart A1.2a

Chart A1.2b

Chart A1.3

Chart A1.3a

Chart A1.3b

The data from chart A1.3b cannot be released due to legal, licensing, or copryright reasons.

Chart A1.4

Chart A1.5

Chart A1.5a

Chart A1.5b

Chart A1.6

Chart A1.7

The data from chart A1.7 cannot be released due to legal, licensing, or copryright reasons.

Chart A1.9

The data from chart A1.9 cannot be released due to legal, licensing, or copryright reasons.

Chart A1.10

Chart A1.11

Chart A1.11b

The data from chart A1.11 cannot be released due to legal, licensing, or copryright reasons.

Chart A1.12

Chart A1.12a

Chart A1.12b

Chart A1.13

Chart A1.13a

The data from chart A1.13a cannot be released due to legal, licensing, or copryright reasons.

Chart A1.13b

Chart A1.14

Chart A1.15

Chart A1.16

Chart A1.17



<<< source: si-rs-en.html >>>

Tax Measures: Supplementary Information

Overview

This annex provides detailed information on each of the tax measures proposed in the Budget.

Table 1 lists these measures and provides estimates of their budgetary impact.

The annex also provides the Notices of Ways and Means Motions to amend the Income Tax Act , the Excise Tax Act , the Excise Act, 2001 and other related legislation and draft amendments to various GST/HST regulations.

In this annex, references to "Budget Day" are to be read as references to the day on which this Budget is presented.

Personal Income Tax Measures

Canada Workers Benefit

The Working Income Tax Benefit is a refundable tax credit that supplements the earnings of low-income workers and improves work incentives for low-income Canadians.

Enhancement

To provide increased support and further improve work incentives, the 2017 Fall Economic Statement announced the Government's intention to enhance the benefits provided by the Working Income Tax Benefit by an additional $500 million per year, starting in 2019.

Budget 2018 proposes to rename the program to the Canada Workers Benefit. Using the funding committed in the 2017 Fall Economic Statement, Budget 2018 proposes that, for 2019, the amount of the benefit be equal to 26 per cent of each dollar of earned income in excess of $3,000 to a maximum benefit of $1,355 for single individuals without dependants and $2,335 for families (couples and single parents). The benefit will be reduced by 12 per cent of adjusted net income in excess of $12,820 for single individuals without dependants and $17,025 for families.

Chart 1 shows the proposed enhancement of the Canada Workers Benefit in 2019 for a single individual without dependants and Chart 2 shows the same for families.

Individuals who are eligible for the Disability Tax Credit may also receive a Canada Workers Benefit disability supplement. Budget 2018 also proposes that the maximum amount of the Canada Workers Benefit disability supplement be increased to $700 in 2019, and the phase-out threshold of the supplement be increased to $24,111 for single individuals without dependants and to $36,483 for families. The reduction rate of the supplement will be decreased to 12 per cent to match the proposed rate for the basic benefit, and to 6 per cent where both partners in a family are eligible for the supplement.

The Government recognizes the efforts that provinces and territories have taken to improve work incentives for low-income individuals and families. To ensure that benefits are harmonized and that the Canada Workers Benefit builds on these efforts, the Government allows for province- or territory-specific changes to the design of the benefit through reconfiguration agreements. These agreements will continue to be guided by the following principles:

they build on actions taken by the province or territory to improve work incentives for low-income individuals and families;

they are cost-neutral to the federal government;

they provide for a minimum benefit for all recipients of the benefit; and

they preserve harmonization of the benefit with existing federal programs.

This measure will apply to the 2019 and subsequent taxation years. Indexation of amounts relating to the Canada Workers Benefit will continue to apply after the 2019 taxation year.

Improving Access

An individual's entitlement to the benefit is calculated primarily on the basis of information found on the individual's annual income tax return. However, in certain cases, additional information is required for this calculation. An individual may claim the benefit by completing Schedule 6, which includes all necessary information to calculate the amount of the benefit, and filing it with their income tax return for the year. If an individual does not claim the benefit, they currently cannot obtain it even if they would otherwise qualify.

Budget 2018 proposes to allow the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA), in circumstances where an individual does not claim the new Canada Workers Benefit, to determine if the individual is eligible to receive the benefit and assess their return as if the benefit had been claimed. Notwithstanding this proposal, it is expected that individuals will continue to complete Schedule 6 in order to properly calculate the amount of tax owing or refundable at the time of filing their returns and in order to avoid any delay where the CRA does not have all necessary information at the time of the initial assessment.

In order to allow the CRA to determine eligibility of an individual who has not completed Schedule 6, the inclusion of certain elements currently required to be included in the calculation of the Canada Workers Benefit will be made optional on the part of the individual. Specifically, an individual will be able to choose whether to include in the calculation of the benefit the tax-exempt part of working income earned on a reserve or an allowance received as an emergency volunteer. An individual who chooses to include any such amount must include all such amounts in both their working income and their adjusted family net income for the purpose of the benefit.

In the case of eligible couples in which neither partner makes a claim, the CRA will designate which spouse or common-law partner receives the benefit.

This measure will apply in respect of income tax returns for 2019 and subsequent taxation years.

To assist in the administration of the Canada Workers Benefit, Budget 2018 also proposes that designated educational institutions in Canada be required to report, to the CRA, prescribed information pertaining to students' enrolment, effective for months of enrolment after 2018. This reporting will also assist the CRA in the administration of existing measures, such as the Lifelong Learning Plan and the exemption for scholarship, fellowship and bursary income.

Medical Expense Tax Credit – Eligible Expenditures

The Medical Expense Tax Credit (METC) is a 15-per-cent non-refundable tax credit that recognizes the effect of above-average medical and disability-related expenses on an individual's ability to pay tax. For 2018, the METC is available for qualifying medical expenses in excess of the lesser of $2,302 and three per cent of the individual's net income.

The list of eligible expenses for the METC is regularly reviewed in light of medical or disability-related developments.

The METC currently provides tax relief in respect of certain expenses incurred for an animal specially trained to assist a patient in coping with the following impairments: blindness; profound deafness; severe autism; severe diabetes; severe epilepsy; or a severe and prolonged impairment that markedly restricts the use of the patient's arms or legs. In order for expenses to qualify for the METC, animals must be provided by a person or organization one of whose main purposes is providing this special training.

Eligible expenses are: the cost of such an animal; costs for its care and maintenance, including food and veterinary care; reasonable travel expenses incurred for a patient to attend a facility that trains patients in the handling of such animals; and reasonable board and lodging expenses for a patient's full-time attendance at such a facility.

Budget 2018 proposes to expand the METC to recognize such expenses where they are incurred in respect of an animal specially trained to perform tasks for a patient with a severe mental impairment in order to assist them in coping with their impairment (e.g., a psychiatric service dog trained to assist with post-traumatic stress disorder). For example, these tasks may include guiding a disoriented patient, searching the home of a patient with severe anxiety before they enter and applying compression to a patient experiencing night terrors. Expenses will not be eligible if they are in respect of an animal that provides comfort or emotional support but that has not been specially trained to perform tasks as described above.

This measure will apply in respect of eligible expenses incurred after 2017.

Registered Disability Savings Plan – Qualifying Plan Holders

Where the capacity of an adult individual to enter into a contract is in doubt, the Income Tax Act requires that the plan holder of the individual's Registered Disability Savings Plan (RDSP) be the individual's legal representative, as recognized under provincial or territorial law.

Establishing a legal guardian or other representative can be a lengthy and expensive process that can have significant repercussions for individuals. Some provinces and territories have instituted streamlined processes that allow for the appointment of a trusted person to manage resources on behalf of an adult who lacks contractual capacity, or have indicated that their system already provides sufficient flexibility to address this concern. Others require more time to develop such a process.

Where the adult individual does not have a legal representative in place, a temporary federal measure exists to allow a qualifying family member (i.e., a parent, spouse or common-law partner) to be the plan holder of the individual's RDSP. This measure is legislated to expire at the end of 2018.

Budget 2018 proposes to extend the temporary measure by five years, to the end of 2023. A qualifying family member who becomes a plan holder before the end of 2023 could remain the plan holder after 2023.

The federal government continues to encourage provinces and territories without streamlined processes in place to examine whether they can accommodate the needs of potential RDSP beneficiaries by developing appropriate, long-term solutions to address RDSP legal representation issues.

Deductibility of Employee Contributions to the Enhanced Portion of the Quebec Pension Plan

On November 2, 2017, the Government of Quebec announced that the Quebec Pension Plan (QPP) would be enhanced in a manner similar to the enhancement of the Canada Pension Plan (CPP) that was announced in 2016.

As part of the CPP enhancement, the Income Tax Act was amended to provide a tax deduction for employee contributions (as well as the "employee" share of contributions by self-employed persons) to the enhanced portion of the CPP. A tax credit will continue to be provided on employee contributions to the base CPP (i.e., the existing CPP). Contributions to the enhanced portion of the CPP will begin in 2019 and will be fully phased in by 2025.

To provide consistent income tax treatment of CPP and QPP contributions, Budget 2018 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act to provide a deduction for employee contributions (as well as the "employee" share of contributions made by self-employed persons) to the enhanced portion of the QPP. In this regard, the Government of Quebec announced on November 21, 2017 that the enhanced portion of employee CPP and QPP contributions will be deductible for Quebec income tax purposes.

Since contributions to the enhanced portion of the QPP will begin to be phased in starting in 2019, this measure will apply to the 2019 and subsequent taxation years.

Child Benefits

Budget 2016 introduced the Canada Child Benefit, replacing the previous child benefit system, which consisted of the Canada Child Tax Benefit, the National Child Benefit supplement and the Universal Child Care Benefit. Payments under the Canada Child Benefit began in July 2016.

Retroactive Eligibility of Foreign-Born Status Indians

Foreign-born status Indians who are neither Canadian citizens nor permanent residents under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act may legally reside in Canada and be eligible for certain programs and services offered by federal, provincial and territorial governments, such as the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax credit, the Working Income Tax Benefit, Old Age Security and Employment Insurance.

Under the Canada Child Benefit, as announced in Budget 2016, foreign-born status Indians residing legally in Canada who are neither Canadian citizens nor permanent residents are eligible for the benefit, where all other eligibility requirements are met. However, these individuals were not eligible under the previous system of child benefits.

Budget 2018 proposes that such individuals be made retroactively eligible for the Canada Child Tax Benefit, the National Child Benefit supplement and the Universal Child Care Benefit, where all other eligibility requirements are met.

This amendment applies from the 2005 taxation year to June 30, 2016.

Provincial/Territorial Access to Taxpayer Information

Most provinces and territories have been using taxpayer information related to the National Child Benefit supplement to calculate adjustments to provincial/territorial social assistance payments. Budget 2018 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act to provide legislative authority for the government to share with the provinces and territories taxpayer information related to the Canada Child Benefit, as of July 1, 2018, solely for the purpose of administering their social assistance payment regimes.

Taxpayer information related to the National Child Benefit supplement in respect of prior benefit years will continue to be shared after June 2018. This will ensure that provinces and territories continue to have access to the information required to, for example, calculate adjustments to social assistance payments for prior benefit years.

Charities – Miscellaneous Technical Issues

Municipalities as Eligible Donees

The Government of Canada supports registered charities in a number of ways, including through the charitable donation tax credit (for individuals) and deduction (for corporations). As a condition of registration, charities are required to follow certain rules, including that they operate exclusively for charitable purposes, devote all of their resources to charitable activities and file an annual information return six months after their fiscal year-end.

The registration of a charity may be revoked at the request of the charity or because the charity has not complied with its registration requirements. In either case, the Income Tax Act imposes a 100-per-cent revocation tax on the charity based on the total net value of its assets. In order to ensure that a revoked charity's accumulated property stays within the charitable sector, a charity can reduce the amount of revocation tax by making qualifying expenditures, including gifts to "eligible donees". Generally speaking, an eligible donee in respect of a particular revoked charity is a registered charity in good standing, the majority of whose directors or trustees deal at arm's length with the directors or trustees of the revoked charity.

In some circumstances, a charity may not be able to locate an eligible donee that is willing or able to assume ownership of one or more of its assets. For example, a charity may operate in a rural area where there are very few charities or it may own assets that are of importance to the community, such as a fire hall or a cemetery. In such cases, a municipality may be the most appropriate recipient of such property even though it is not a charity.

Budget 2018 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act to allow transfers of property to municipalities to be considered qualifying expenditures for the purposes of the revocation tax, subject to the approval of the Minister of National Revenue on a case-by-case basis. In situations where a suitable recipient cannot be found to keep a property in the charitable sector, this change will allow the property to be transferred to a municipality for the benefit of the community.

This measure will apply to transfers made on or after Budget Day.

Universities Outside Canada

Canadians may claim the charitable donation tax credit or deduction for donations made to registered charities and other "qualified donees". Since 1966, universities outside Canada have been eligible to be recognized as qualified donees if they demonstrate to the Canada Revenue Agency that, among other things, their student body ordinarily includes students from Canada. Qualifying universities outside Canada are included in Schedule VIII to the Income Tax Regulations .

In 2011, the Income Tax Act was amended so that certain categories of qualified donees, including universities outside Canada, are now required to register with the Canada Revenue Agency, and to meet certain receipting and record-keeping conditions. In addition, they may have their registration suspended or revoked for certain non-compliance with the rules. Once these qualified donees are registered, public notification is provided by listing them on the Government of Canada's website. As a result of these two registration processes, qualifying universities outside of Canada are required to be added to two separate, identical lists.

To simplify the administration of these rules and streamline the registration process for universities outside Canada as qualified donees, Budget 2018 proposes to remove the requirement that universities outside Canada be prescribed in the Income Tax Regulations .

This measure will apply as of Budget Day.

Mineral Exploration Tax Credit for Flow-Through Share Investors

Flow-through shares allow resource companies to renounce or "flow through" tax expenses associated with their Canadian exploration activities to investors, who can deduct the expenses in calculating their own taxable income. The mineral exploration tax credit provides an additional income tax benefit for individuals who invest in mining flow-through shares, which augments the tax benefits associated with the deductions that are flowed through. This credit is equal to 15 per cent of specified mineral exploration expenses incurred in Canada and renounced to flow-through share investors. Like flow-through shares, the credit facilitates the raising of equity to fund exploration by enabling companies to issue shares at a premium.

The Government proposes to extend eligibility for the mineral exploration tax credit for an additional year, to flow-through share agreements entered into on or before March 31, 2019. Under the existing "look-back" rule, funds raised in one calendar year with the benefit of the credit can be spent on eligible exploration up to the end of the following calendar year. Therefore, for example, funds raised with the credit during the first three months of 2019 can support eligible exploration until the end of 2020.

Mineral exploration, as well as new mining and related processing activities that could follow from successful exploration efforts, can be associated with a variety of environmental impacts to soil, water and air and, as a result, could have an impact on the targets and actions in the Federal Sustainable Development Strategy. All such activity, however, is subject to applicable federal and provincial environmental regulations, including project-specific environmental assessments where required.

Reporting Requirements for Trusts

Authorities require sufficient information in order to determine taxpayers' tax liabilities and to effectively counter aggressive tax avoidance as well as tax evasion, money laundering and other criminal activities. Some taxpayers have used trusts in complex arrangements to prevent the appropriate authorities from acquiring this required information.

A trust that does not earn income or make distributions in a year is generally not required to file an annual (T3) return of income. A trust is required to file a T3 return if the trust has tax payable or it distributes all or part of its income or capital to its beneficiaries. Even if a trust is required to file a return of income for a year, there is no requirement for the trust to report the identity of all its beneficiaries. Given the absence of an annual reporting requirement, and the limitations with respect to the information collected when reporting is required, there are significant gaps with respect to the information that is currently collected with respect to trusts.

As a consequence, Budget 2017 announced the Government's intention to examine ways to enhance the tax reporting requirements for trusts in order to improve the collection of beneficial ownership information.

Reporting Requirements

To improve the collection of beneficial ownership information with respect to trusts, Budget 2018 proposes to require that certain trusts provide additional information on an annual basis. The new reporting requirements will impose an obligation on certain trusts to file a T3 return where one does not currently exist. This information would be used to help the Canada Revenue Agency assess the tax liability for trusts and its beneficiaries.

The new reporting requirements will apply to express trusts that are resident in Canada and to non-resident trusts that are currently required to file a T3 return. An express trust is generally a trust created with the settlor's express intent, usually made in writing (as opposed to a resulting or constructive trust, or certain trusts deemed to arise under the provisions of a statute). Exceptions to the additional reporting requirements are proposed for the following types of trusts:

mutual fund trusts, segregated funds and master trusts;

trusts governed by registered plans (i.e., deferred profit sharing plans, pooled registered pension plans, registered disability savings plans, registered education savings plans, registered pension plans, registered retirement income funds, registered retirement savings plans, registered supplementary unemployment benefit plans and tax-free savings accounts);

lawyers' general trust accounts;

graduated rate estates and qualified disability trusts;

trusts that qualify as non-profit organizations or registered charities; and

trusts that have been in existence for less than three months or that hold less than $50,000 in assets throughout the taxation year (provided, in the latter case, that their holdings are confined to deposits, government debt obligations and listed securities).

Where the new reporting requirements apply to a trust, the trust will be required to report the identity of all trustees, beneficiaries and settlors of the trust, as well as the identity of each person who has the ability (through the trust terms or a related agreement) to exert control over trustee decisions regarding the appointment of income or capital of the trust (e.g., a protector).

In order to implement the new reporting requirements, and to improve the Canada Revenue Agency's audit and administration of trusts and trust returns, Budget 2018 proposes to provide funding of $79 million over a five-year period and $15 million on an ongoing basis to the Canada Revenue Agency in order to support the development of an electronic platform for processing T3 returns.

These proposed new reporting requirements will apply to returns required to be filed for the 2021 and subsequent taxation years.

Penalties

To support these new reporting requirements, Budget 2018 proposes to introduce new penalties for a failure to file a T3 return, including a required beneficial ownership schedule, in circumstances where the schedule is required. The penalty will be equal to $25 for each day of delinquency, with a minimum penalty of $100 and a maximum penalty of $2,500. If a failure to file the return was made knowingly, or due to gross negligence, an additional penalty will apply. The additional penalty will be equal to five per cent of the maximum fair market value of property held during the relevant year by the trust, with a minimum penalty of $2,500. As well, existing penalties will continue to apply.

The new penalties will apply in respect of returns required to be filed for the 2021 and subsequent taxation years.

Business Income Tax Measures

Passive Investment Income

Active business income earned by private corporations is taxed at corporate income tax rates that are generally lower than personal income tax rates, giving these corporations more money to invest in order to grow their business. In addition, a small Canadian-controlled private corporation (CCPC) can benefit from a corporate income tax rate on qualifying active business income that is lower than the general corporate income tax rate. The intention of the lower small business tax rate is to leave small CCPCs, which may have difficulty accessing capital, with more retained earnings to reinvest in their active businesses.

Business income retained in a corporation, however, can also be used to finance passive investments. The current tax regime relating to passive investment income earned by private corporations has been in place since 1972. In contrast to active business income (which includes investment income that is incidental to an active business), additional taxes apply to passive investment income in the year in which it is earned. These additional taxes are intended to ensure that taxes payable by private corporations on investment income approximate top federal-provincial-territorial personal income tax rates. A portion of the tax on investment income is refundable to a corporation upon the payment of taxable dividends, and the income is then subject to progressive personal income tax rates in the hands of its individual shareholders.

Where funds invested passively within a private corporation have been financed with retained earnings that have been taxed at preferential corporate income tax rates, owners of the corporation can benefit from a tax deferral advantage relative to a situation where the corporation distributes the retained earnings and the owners invest personally in passive investments. This issue was the subject of public consultations that were launched in July 2017.

Budget 2018 proposes two measures, applicable to taxation years that begin after 2018, to limit tax deferral advantages on passive investment income earned inside private corporations. These measures take into account the feedback received from stakeholders in response to the July 2017 consultation.

Business Limit

The Government has proposed to reduce the tax rate for qualifying active business income of small CCPCs from 10.5 per cent to 10 per cent for 2018 and to 9 per cent as of 2019. This lower rate – relative to the 15-per-cent general corporate rate – is intended to increase the after-tax income available for reinvestment in the active business, in recognition that small businesses tend to have more difficulty accessing capital. This rate reduction is provided through the small business deduction.

This preferential tax rate applies on up to $500,000 of qualifying active business income of a CCPC (the "business limit"). There is a requirement to allocate the business limit among associated corporations. The business limit is reduced on a straight-line basis for a CCPC and its associated corporations having between $10 million and $15 million of total taxable capital employed in Canada.

When retained earnings taxed at the small business rate are used to invest passively, rather than in the active business, significant tax deferral advantages can be realized relative to an individual investor.

Budget 2018 proposes to reduce the business limit for CCPCs (and their associated corporations) that have significant income from passive investments.

Business Limit – Reduction

Under this measure, the business limit will be reduced on a straight-line basis for CCPCs having between $50,000 and $150,000 in investment income.

The measure will affect CCPCs only to the extent that their business income exceeds the reduced business limit (Table 2). For example, a CCPC with $100,000 of investment income would have its business limit reduced to $250,000. As long as the reduced business limit remains above the active business income of the CCPC, all of that income would continue to be taxed at the small business tax rate. A CCPC with $75,000 of business income would have to earn more than $135,000 in passive income before its business limit is reduced below its business income. This feature of the proposed rules recognizes that CCPCs with lower amounts of business income generate less retained earnings that can later be used for reinvestment in the business, and may have more difficulty accessing capital. CCPCs with business income above the reduced business limit will be taxed on income above the business limit at the general corporate tax rate.

The measure will be implemented based on a CCPC's investment income, which is earned on the underlying passive investment assets held by the corporation. Assuming a five-per-cent return on such investments, the business limit would effectively be reduced on a straight-line basis for CCPCs having between $1 million and $3 million of passive assets. Assuming a two-per-cent return in low-risk investments, the business limit would be reduced between $2.5 million and $7.5 million of passive assets. For illustrative purposes, Table 3 shows the effect of the measure on qualifying active business income for a given level of passive assets and an assumed rate of return. For instance, a CCPC with $3.75 million in passive assets invested at a two-per-cent rate of return would continue to benefit from the small business tax rate on up to $375,000 of business income.

It is expected that about three per cent of CCPCs claiming the small business deduction will be affected by the measure.

The business limit reduction under this measure will operate alongside the business limit reduction that applies in respect of taxable capital in excess of $10 million. The reduction in a corporation's business limit will be the greater of the reduction under this measure and the existing reduction based on taxable capital.

The reduction of the business limit for any particular corporation under this measure will be based on the investment income of the corporation and, consistent with the reduction in the business limit based on taxable capital, any other associated corporations with which it is required to share the business limit for a taxation year.

Business Limit – Adjusted Aggregate Investment Income

For the purpose of determining the reduction of the business limit of a CCPC, investment income will be measured by a new concept of "adjusted aggregate investment income" which will be based on "aggregate investment income" (a concept that is currently used in computing the amount of refundable taxes in respect of a CCPC's investment income) with certain adjustments. The adjustments will include the following:

taxable capital gains (and losses) will be excluded to the extent they arise from the disposition of

a property that is used principally in an active business carried on primarily in Canada by the CCPC or by a related CCPC; or

a share of another CCPC that is connected with the CCPC, where, in general terms, all or substantially all of the fair market value of the assets of the other CCPC is attributable directly or indirectly to assets that are used principally in an active business carried on primarily in Canada, and certain other conditions are met;

net capital losses carried over from other taxation years will be excluded;

dividends from non-connected corporations will be added; and

income from savings in a life insurance policy that is not an exempt policy will be added, to the extent it is not otherwise included in aggregate investment income.

Consistent with existing rules relating to aggregate investment income, adjusted aggregate investment income will not include income that is incidental to an active business.

Application

This measure will apply to taxation years that begin after 2018.

Rules will apply to prevent transactions designed to avoid the measure, such as the creation of a short taxation year in order to defer its application and the transfer of assets by a corporation to a related corporation that is not associated with it.

Refundability of Taxes on Investment Income

The current tax regime relating to refundable taxes on investment income of private corporations seeks to tax income from passive investments at approximately the top personal income tax rate while that income is retained in the corporation. Some or all of these taxes are added to the corporation's refundable dividend tax on hand (RDTOH) account and are refundable at a rate of $38.33 for every $100 of taxable dividends paid to shareholders.

For income tax purposes, dividends paid by corporations are either "eligible" or "non-eligible":

Non-eligible dividends are presumed to have been paid from a corporation's active business income that has been subject to the small business tax rate (including non-eligible dividends received by the corporation) or from passive investment income, but excluding the non-taxable portion of capital gains as well as eligible portfolio dividends (i.e., dividends that are paid by non-connected corporations as eligible dividends). An individual who receives non-eligible dividends is entitled to the ordinary dividend tax credit which, at the federal level, the Government has proposed be 10 per cent in 2018, and 9 per cent after 2018.

Eligible dividends are presumed to have been paid from a corporation's active business income that has been subject to the general corporate income tax rate (including eligible dividends received by the corporation). An individual who receives eligible dividends is entitled to the enhanced dividend tax credit which, at the federal level, is 15 per cent.

Generally, investment income earned by private corporations must be paid as non-eligible dividends (exceptions include eligible portfolio dividends, which may be paid as eligible dividends, and the non-taxable portion of capital gains, which may be paid as tax-free capital dividends). A corporation, however, may obtain a refund of taxes paid on investment income, reflected in the corporation's RDTOH account, regardless of whether the dividends paid are eligible or non-eligible.

As a result, the current system allows a corporation to receive an RDTOH refund upon the payment of an eligible dividend (which entitles an individual receiving the dividend to the enhanced dividend tax credit) in situations where the corporation's RDTOH was generated from investment income that would need to be paid as a non-eligible dividend. This can provide a tax deferral advantage on passive investment income by allowing private corporations paying eligible dividends sourced from active business income taxed at the general corporate income tax rate to generate a refund of taxes paid on passive income.

To better align the refund of taxes paid on passive income with the payment of dividends sourced from passive income, Budget 2018 proposes that a refund of RDTOH be available only in cases where a private corporation pays non-eligible dividends. An exception will be provided in respect of RDTOH that arises from eligible portfolio dividends received by a corporation, in which case the corporation will still be able to obtain a refund of that RDTOH upon the payment of eligible dividends.

The different treatment proposed regarding the refund of taxes imposed on eligible portfolio dividend income will necessitate the addition of a new RDTOH account.

This new account (eligible RDTOH) will track refundable taxes paid under Part IV of the Income Tax Act on eligible portfolio dividends. Any taxable dividend (i.e., eligible or non-eligible) will entitle the corporation to a refund from its eligible RDTOH account (subject to the ordering rule described below).

The current RDTOH account (which will now be referred to as non-eligible RDTOH) will track refundable taxes paid under Part I of the Income Tax Act on investment income as well as under Part IV on non-eligible portfolio dividends (i.e., dividends that are paid by non-connected corporations as non-eligible dividends). Refunds from this account will be obtained only upon the payment of non-eligible dividends.

RDTOH Recapture – Connected Corporations

Currently, if a corporation obtains a refund of RDTOH upon the payment of a dividend to a connected corporation, the recipient corporation pays refundable tax under Part IV of the Income Tax Act equal to the amount of tax refunded to the payor. This amount is then added to the recipient corporation's RDTOH account. Under this measure, the corporation receiving such a dividend will continue to pay an amount of Part IV tax equal to the refund obtained by the payor corporation. This amount, however, will be added to the RDTOH account of the recipient corporation that matches the RDTOH account from which the payor corporation obtained its refund.

RDTOH Refunds – Ordering Rule

Upon the payment of a non-eligible dividend, a private corporation will be required to obtain a refund from its non-eligible RDTOH account before it obtains a refund from its eligible RDTOH account.

Application

This measure will apply to taxation years that begin after 2018.

An anti-avoidance rule will apply to prevent the deferral of the application of this measure through the creation of a short taxation year.

A corporation's existing RDTOH balance will be allocated as follows:

For a CCPC, the lesser of its existing RDTOH balance and an amount equal to 38⅓ per cent of the balance of its general rate income pool, if any, will be allocated to its eligible RDTOH account. Any remaining balance will be allocated to its non-eligible RDTOH account.

For any other corporation, all of the corporation's existing RDTOH balance will be allocated to its eligible RDTOH account.

Tax Support for Clean Energy

Under the capital cost allowance regime, Classes 43.1 and 43.2 of Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations provide accelerated capital cost allowance rates (30 per cent and 50 per cent, respectively, on a declining-balance basis) for investments in specified clean energy generation and conservation equipment. Both classes include eligible equipment that generates or conserves energy by:

using a renewable energy source (e.g., wind, solar or small hydro);

using a fuel from waste (e.g., landfill gas, wood waste or manure); or

making efficient use of fossil fuels (e.g., high efficiency cogeneration systems, which simultaneously produce electricity and useful heat).

Providing accelerated capital cost allowance is an exception to the general practice of setting capital cost allowance rates based on the useful life of assets. Accelerated capital cost allowance provides a financial benefit by deferring taxation.

Class 43.2 was introduced in 2005 and is currently available in respect of property acquired before 2020. It generally includes property that would otherwise be included in Class 43.1, except that in certain cases Class 43.2 imposes stricter eligibility criteria.

Budget 2018 proposes to extend eligibility for Class 43.2 by five years so that it is available in respect of property acquired before 2025.

This measure will continue to encourage investment in technologies that can contribute to a reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases and air pollutants, as well as an increase in the share of Canada's electricity that is renewable and non-emitting, in support of targets set out in the Federal Sustainable Development Strategy.

Artificial Losses Using Equity-Based Financial Arrangements

The Income Tax Act permits, subject to certain exceptions, a corporation to deduct dividends received on a share of a corporation resident in Canada (a "Canadian share"). The dividend rental arrangement rules provide one such exception by denying the inter-corporate dividend deduction to a taxpayer where the main reason for an arrangement is to enable the taxpayer to receive a dividend on a Canadian share, and the risk of loss or opportunity for gain or profit in respect of the Canadian share accrues to someone else.

In the past, some Canadian financial institutions entered into sophisticated financial arrangements that attempted to circumvent the dividend rental arrangement rules. These arrangements typically involved the use of an equity derivative to transfer all or substantially all of the risk of loss and opportunity for gain or profit in respect of a Canadian share from a taxpayer (the Canadian financial institution), who retained legal ownership of the underlying Canadian share, to an investor seeking economic exposure to the Canadian share (the counterparty under the equity derivative). Under these arrangements, the taxpayer was generally required to transfer the economic benefit of any dividends received through "dividend-equivalent payments" to the investor. On the premise that the dividend rental arrangement rules did not apply, the taxpayer claimed an artificial tax loss on the arrangement by taking advantage of the inter-corporate dividend deduction, resulting in tax-free dividend income, while also deducting the amount of the dividend-equivalent payments made to the investor under the equity derivative.

Budget 2015 introduced amendments to the dividend rental arrangement rules that specifically targeted these arrangements. Subject to certain exceptions (e.g., the "no tax-indifferent investor" exception described below), the Budget 2015 amendments essentially deny the inter-corporate dividend deduction on dividends received by a taxpayer on a Canadian share in respect of which there is a synthetic equity arrangement. In general terms, a synthetic equity arrangement, in respect of a Canadian share owned by a taxpayer, is considered to exist where the taxpayer (or a person that does not deal at arm's length with the taxpayer) enters into one or more agreements that have the effect of providing to an investor all or substantially all of the risk of loss and opportunity for gain or profit in respect of the Canadian share.

The Government is concerned that certain taxpayers are still engaging in abusive arrangements that are intended to circumvent the dividend rental arrangement rules. Although these arrangements can be challenged by the Government based on existing rules in the Income Tax Act , these challenges could be both time-consuming and costly. Accordingly, the Government is introducing specific legislation to clarify certain aspects of the synthetic equity arrangement rules and the securities lending arrangement rules to prevent taxpayers from realizing artificial tax losses through the use of equity-based financial arrangements to circumvent these rules.

Synthetic Equity Arrangements

The no tax-indifferent investor exception is provided where a taxpayer holds a Canadian share and can establish that no tax-indifferent investor has all or substantially all of the risk of loss and opportunity for gain or profit in respect of the share by virtue of

a synthetic equity arrangement, or

another equity derivative that is entered into in connection with the synthetic equity arrangement (referred to as a "specified synthetic equity arrangement").

A taxpayer is able to satisfy this exception by obtaining certain specific representations from its counterparty. There is a concern that certain taxpayers take the position that this exception can be met in circumstances where a tax-indifferent investor ultimately obtains all or substantially all of the risk of loss and opportunity for gain or profit of a Canadian share from a counterparty to the taxpayer otherwise than through a synthetic equity arrangement or a specified synthetic equity arrangement.

Budget 2018 proposes an amendment to the no tax-indifferent investor exception to the synthetic equity arrangement rules that will clarify that the exception cannot be met when a tax-indifferent investor obtains all or substantially all of the risk of loss and opportunity for gain or profit in respect of the Canadian share, in any way, including where the tax-indifferent investor has not entered into a synthetic equity arrangement or a specified synthetic equity arrangement in respect of the share.

The proposed amendments will apply to dividends that are paid, or become payable, on or after Budget Day.

Securities Lending Arrangements

The Government has become aware that certain taxpayers may be entering into other types of sophisticated equity-based financial arrangements, such as security lending and repurchase arrangements, in a manner that attempts to achieve the same unintended tax benefit that was targeted by the synthetic equity arrangement rules. In general terms, under these arrangements, a counterparty transfers or lends a Canadian share to a taxpayer, and the taxpayer agrees to transfer or return an identical share to the counterparty in the future. Over the term of the arrangement, the taxpayer is obligated to pay to the counterparty amounts (dividend compensation payments) as compensation for all dividends received on the transferred or lent Canadian share.

By acquiring a Canadian share under such an arrangement, a taxpayer could place itself in a similar tax position as if it entered into a synthetic equity arrangement. In particular, the taxpayer could receive dividends on the acquired Canadian share while, at the same time, being obligated to pay dividend compensation payments to the counterparty. To the extent that the taxpayer takes the position that the application of existing income tax rules in its particular circumstances allow it to deduct dividend compensation payments in excess of the amount of dividends received on the Canadian share that is included in its taxable income, it could claim an artificial tax loss on the arrangement.

For example, certain taxpayers may seek a tax benefit by entering into securities lending or repurchase arrangements that are designed to fail the requirements of the "securities lending arrangement" definition in the Income Tax Act . When a securities lending or repurchase arrangement does not meet that definition, dividend compensation payments made by the taxpayer will generally be fully deductible. In these circumstances, these taxpayers take the position that the dividend rental arrangement rules do not apply and claim an inter-corporate dividend deduction on the dividends received on the acquired Canadian share, resulting in tax-free dividend income, while also deducting the amount of the dividend compensation payments.

Budget 2018 proposes an amendment to broaden the "securities lending arrangement" definition in the Income Tax Act to ensure that taxpayers that enter into arrangements that are substantially similar to those that fall within that definition are subject to several provisions normally applicable to "securities lending arrangements". As a result of this amendment, when a taxpayer receives dividends on a Canadian share acquired under such a substantially similar arrangement, the dividend rental arrangement rules will generally apply. Therefore, the inter-corporate dividend deduction will be denied, resulting in a dividend income inclusion that will appropriately offset the available deduction for the amount of the corresponding dividend compensation payments made to the counterparty under the arrangement.

Budget 2018 also proposes an amendment to clarify the interaction of two rules governing the deductibility of dividend compensation payments made by a taxpayer under a securities lending arrangement. Under the first rule, a taxpayer that is a registered securities dealer is permitted to deduct up to two-thirds of a dividend compensation payment to a counterparty. The second rule applies when a securities lending arrangement is a dividend rental arrangement. In these circumstances, the second rule generally permits the taxpayer, whether or not it is a registered securities dealer, to fully deduct any dividend compensation payment made to the counterparty. The proposed amendment will clarify that this first rule does not apply when the second rule applies.

The proposed amendments to the securities lending arrangement rules will apply to dividend compensation payments that are made on or after Budget Day unless the securities lending or repurchase arrangement was in place before Budget Day, in which case the amendments will apply to dividend compensation payments that are made after September 2018.

Stop-Loss Rule on Share Repurchase Transactions

The Income Tax Act generally permits a corporation to deduct dividends received on a share of a corporation resident in Canada in computing its taxable income. This inter-corporate dividend deduction is available for dividends actually received; it is also available for dividends that are deemed to have been received on a share, which can arise on a repurchase of the share. The deduction is intended to limit the imposition of multiple levels of corporate taxation on earnings distributed from one corporation to another.

To prevent abuses of this inter-corporate dividend deduction mechanism, dividend stop-loss rules have been introduced that reduce, in specific cases, the amount of a tax loss otherwise realized by a corporation on a disposition of shares. Such losses are reduced by an amount equal to the tax-free dividends received (or deemed to have been received) on these shares on or before the disposition. However, in certain circumstances, the reduction can be less than the amount of tax-free dividends received.

In the past, some Canadian financial institutions had relied on the exceptions to the dividend stop-loss rule pertaining to shares held as mark-to-market property to realize artificial tax losses on certain share repurchase transactions. In such transactions, a Canadian public corporation seeking to repurchase its shares from the public agreed with a Canadian financial institution that it would repurchase its shares owned by the Canadian financial institution pursuant to a private agreement. Given that the shares were not repurchased in the "open market", the Canadian financial institution was deemed under normal rules to have received a dividend to the extent that the amount paid to the Canadian financial institution on the repurchase exceeded the paid-up capital of the repurchased shares. The Canadian financial institution then claimed a double deduction on that deemed dividend. First, it claimed an inter-corporate dividend deduction that would offset the deemed dividend. Second, it deducted the amount of the deemed dividend from its proceeds of disposition for the purposes of calculating its profit or loss on the share repurchase.

In these circumstances, the Canadian financial institution sought to realize a tax loss on the share repurchase that exceeded any mark-to-market income that could have been previously realized on the repurchased shares due to their increase in value. This tax benefit would effectively be shared by the Canadian financial institution with the Canadian public corporation by agreeing to a redemption price of the shares below their trading price.

In reaction to these transactions, a measure announced in Budget 2011 makes the dividend stop-loss rule pertaining to shares held as mark-to-market property apply in all cases where the taxpayer is deemed to have received a dividend on a share repurchase. However, the formula under which the allowable loss is calculated was not changed with the result that, even when applicable, the dividend stop-loss rule generally denies only a portion of the tax loss realized on a share repurchase equal to the excess of the original cost of the shares over their paid-up capital. The portion of the tax loss equal to the mark-to-market income previously realized on the shares is allowed on the premise that the Canadian financial institution already paid tax on that income. However, if the repurchased shares were fully hedged, which is typically the case, then this premise does not hold true. In particular, any mark-to-market income realized on the shares due to their increase in value would be fully offset under the hedge. As a result, the Canadian financial institution would realize an artificial tax loss on the share repurchase. Since the 2011 Budget amendment, Canadian financial institutions have continued to enter into these transactions with a view to obtaining these unintended tax benefits.

Although these transactions can be challenged by the Government based on existing rules in the Income Tax Act , these challenges could be both time-consuming and costly.

Budget 2018 proposes to amend the provisions of the Income Tax Act pertaining to shares held as mark-to-market property so that the tax loss otherwise realized on a share repurchase is generally decreased by the dividend deemed to be received on that repurchase when that dividend is eligible for the inter-corporate dividend deduction.

This measure will apply in respect of share repurchases that occur on or after Budget Day.

At-Risk Rules for Tiered Partnerships

The income (or loss) of a partnership for income tax purposes is allocated to its partners, who include (or deduct) the amount in calculating their own income. Limited partners of a partnership may deduct losses of the partnership allocated to them only to the extent of their "at-risk amount" in respect of the partnership. This amount is generally a measure of the limited partner's invested capital that is at risk in the partnership, and is increased by unpaid income allocated from the partnership. The at-risk rules ensure that a limited partner cannot shelter income from other sources with partnership losses in excess of what they put at risk in the partnership.

Losses of a partnership allocated to a limited partner in excess of their at-risk amount in respect of the partnership are not deductible and become "limited partnership losses", which are generally eligible for an indefinite carry-forward. If eligible, these losses can be deducted in a future year to the extent that the limited partner's at-risk amount in the partnership has increased. When a limited partner disposes of a limited partnership interest, any undeducted limited partnership losses of the limited partner are reflected in the adjusted cost base of the partnership interest, which would result in a lower capital gain or higher capital loss on the disposition.

The long-standing understanding of the at-risk rules, on which basis they have been administered since their introduction, has been that their application extends to cases in which the limited partner holding a limited partnership interest is another partnership (a "tiered partnership" structure). In such cases, the limited partnership losses would not be eligible to be carried forward by the partnership holding the limited partnership interest. However, such limited partnership losses would be reflected in the adjusted cost base of the limited partnership interest.

A recent Federal Court of Appeal decision has constrained the application of the at-risk rules in the context of tiered partnership structures. The decision is inconsistent with the policy underlying the at-risk rules and could result in limited partnership losses becoming deductible in situations where, under the long-standing understanding of the at-risk rules, they would have been restricted. Given the indefinite carry-forward of limited partnership losses, this poses a significant risk to the tax base.

Budget 2018 proposes to clarify that the at-risk rules apply to a partnership that is itself a limited partner of another partnership. This measure, along with a number of consequential changes, will ensure that the at-risk rules apply appropriately at each level of a tiered partnership structure. In particular, for a partnership that is a limited partner of another partnership, the losses from the other partnership that can be allocated to the partnership's members will be restricted by that partnership's at-risk amount in respect of the other partnership.

In addition, consistent with the long-standing understanding of the at-risk rules, limited partnership losses of a limited partner that is itself a partnership will not be eligible for an indefinite carry-forward. Such losses will be reflected in the adjusted cost base of the partnership's interest in the limited partnership.

This measure will apply in respect of taxation years that end on or after Budget Day, including in respect of losses incurred in taxation years that end prior to Budget Day. In particular, losses from a partnership incurred in a taxation year that ended prior to Budget Day will not be available to be carried forward to a taxation year that ends on or after Budget Day if the losses were allocated – for the year in which the losses were incurred – to a limited partner that is another partnership.

Health and Welfare Trusts

A Health and Welfare Trust is a trust established by an employer for the purpose of providing health and welfare benefits to its employees. The tax treatment of such a trust is not explicitly set out in the Income Tax Act . Since 1966, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) has published administrative positions regarding the requirements for qualifying as a Health and Welfare Trust along with rules relating to contributions to, and the computation of taxable income of, such a trust. The tax treatment of health benefits paid to employees is set out in the Income Tax Act .

The Employee Life and Health Trust rules were added to the Income Tax Act in 2010. These trusts also provide health benefits for employees – specifically, group sickness or accident insurance plans, private health services plans and group term life insurance policies. The Employee Life and Health Trust rules in the Income Tax Act are very similar to the CRA's administrative positions for Health and Welfare Trusts. However, the Employee Life and Health Trust legislation explicitly deals with certain issues (e.g., the treatment of surplus income and pre-funding of benefits) that are not dealt with in the administrative Health and Welfare Trust regime.

In order to provide more certainty for taxpayers and greater consistency in the tax treatment of such arrangements, Budget 2018 proposes that only one set of rules apply to these arrangements. As such, the CRA will no longer apply their administrative positions with respect to Health and Welfare Trusts after the end of 2020. To facilitate the conversion of existing Health and Welfare Trusts to Employee Life and Health Trusts, transitional rules will be added to the Income Tax Act . Trusts that do not convert (or wind up) to an Employee Life and Health Trust will be subject to the normal income tax rules for trusts. In addition, the CRA will not apply its administrative positions with respect to Health and Welfare Trusts to trusts established after Budget Day and will announce transitional administrative guidance relating to winding up existing Health and Welfare Trusts.

Stakeholders are invited to submit comments on transitional issues, both administrative and legislative, to facilitate the discontinuation of the Health and Welfare Trust regime. Following the consultation, the Government intends to release draft legislative proposals and transitional administrative guidance. Issues currently under consideration include:

whether a Health and Welfare Trust can continue as an Employee Life and Health Trust without the creation of a new trust;

whether, and under what conditions, a rollover of assets to a new trust will be permitted; and

the tax implications for a Health and Welfare Trust that does not satisfy the conditions to become an Employee Life and Health Trust, or where the trustees of a Health and Welfare Trust choose not to convert.

Please send your comments by June 29, 2018.

International Tax Measures

Cross-Border Surplus Stripping using Partnerships and Trusts

The paid-up capital (PUC) of the shares of a Canadian corporation generally represents the amount of capital that has been contributed to the corporation by its shareholders. PUC is a valuable tax attribute of a corporation primarily because it can be returned to its shareholders free of tax. It is also included in the determination of a corporation's equity under the thin capitalization rules, which can increase the amount of its deductible interest expense. Distributions to shareholders that are in excess of PUC are normally treated as taxable dividends and are, for non-resident shareholders, subject to a 25-per-cent withholding tax (which may be reduced under a tax treaty).

The Income Tax Act contains a rule that is intended to prevent a non-resident shareholder from entering into transactions to extract free of tax (or "strip") a Canadian corporation's surplus in excess of the PUC of its shares, or to artificially increase the PUC of such shares. When applicable, this rule can result in a deemed dividend to the non-resident or can suppress the PUC that would otherwise have been created as a result of the transactions.

This cross-border anti-surplus-stripping rule seeks to prevent non-residents from achieving these tax benefits through a transfer of the shares of one corporation resident in Canada (the "Canadian subject corporation"), to another such corporation (the "Canadian purchaser corporation") with which the non-resident does not deal at arm's length, in exchange for shares of the Canadian purchaser corporation or other forms of consideration.

Although this rule partly addresses the use of a partnership as an intermediary, it does not expressly address situations where a non-resident person disposes of an interest in a partnership that owns shares of a Canadian subject corporation. Some taxpayers have attempted to exploit this aspect of the rule by engaging in internal reorganizations that involve a transfer by a non-resident of shares of a Canadian subject corporation to a partnership in exchange for an interest in the partnership. The partnership interest is then transferred to a Canadian purchaser corporation. The Government also has concerns with variations of this partnership planning, and similar planning involving trusts, both in the context of this rule and a similar rule that applies to corporate immigration.

To ensure that the underlying purposes of the cross-border anti-surplus-stripping rule, and the corresponding corporate immigration rule, cannot be frustrated by transactions involving partnerships or trusts, Budget 2018 proposes to amend these provisions to add comprehensive "look-through" rules for such entities. These rules will allocate the assets, liabilities and transactions of a partnership or trust to its members or beneficiaries, as the case may be, based on the relative fair market value of their interests.

This measure will apply to transactions that occur on or after Budget Day.

Transactions that occur before Budget Day may be challenged using the general anti-avoidance rule. Any use of discretionary or similar interests for the purpose of obtaining inappropriate results under the proposed allocation mechanism, or other planning that seeks to achieve indirectly what cannot be done directly under these anti-surplus-stripping rules, would be inconsistent with the policy intent of these rules and would be expected to be challenged using existing rules, including the general anti-avoidance rule.

Foreign Affiliates

The Income Tax Act contains special rules for the taxation of Canadian resident shareholders of foreign affiliates. Budget 2018 proposes modifications to these rules as a result of the Government's ongoing monitoring of developments in this area.

A foreign affiliate of a taxpayer resident in Canada is a non-resident corporation in which the taxpayer has a significant interest. A controlled foreign affiliate of a taxpayer is generally a foreign affiliate in which the taxpayer has, or participates in, a controlling interest.

The taxpayer's share of the income of a foreign affiliate from an active business is not taxed until such time as it is paid as a dividend by the affiliate to the taxpayer. This dividend can be received tax-free to the extent that it is paid out of the foreign affiliate's exempt surplus. A foreign affiliate will have exempt surplus if it has income from an active business carried on by it in a country with which Canada has a tax treaty or a tax information exchange agreement (TIEA) and it is resident in such a country.

Certain income of a controlled foreign affiliate (i.e., income from property, from a business other than active business and from other specified sources) is taxable in the hands of the taxpayer in the year in which it is earned, whether or not it is distributed, with an offsetting deduction for taxes paid by the affiliate. This income is referred to as foreign accrual property income (FAPI).

Investment Businesses

Income from an investment business carried on by a foreign affiliate of a taxpayer is included in the foreign affiliate's FAPI. An investment business is generally defined as a business the principal purpose of which is to derive income from property. However, an investment business does not include a business carried on by a foreign affiliate if certain conditions are satisfied. One of these conditions, in general terms, is that the affiliate employ more than five full-time employees (or the equivalent) in the active conduct of the business. This condition is sometimes referred to as the "six employees test". If the affiliate's investment activities are so significant that they require more than five full-time employees and the other conditions are satisfied, the affiliate's business is treated as an active business and income from that business is excluded from FAPI.

The investment business definition applies on a business-by-business basis. Accordingly, to the extent that a single foreign affiliate carries on multiple businesses, each such business would have to meet the six employees test in order to ensure that it is not an investment business.

Certain taxpayers whose foreign investment activities would not warrant more than five full-time employees have engaged in tax planning with other taxpayers in similar circumstances seeking to meet the six employees test. This planning involves grouping their financial assets together in a common foreign affiliate in order to carry on investment activities outside of Canada through that affiliate. While the taxpayers combine their assets in a common affiliate and take the position that the affiliate is carrying on a single business, their respective returns are determined separately by reference to their contributed assets.

To effect this planning, the share, contractual or other rights under these arrangements typically ensure that each taxpayer retains control over its contributed assets and that any returns from those assets accrue to its benefit. This type of planning is sometimes referred to as a "tracking arrangement". In such arrangements, the assets contributed by the (often unrelated) Canadian taxpayers are not truly pooled, as the economic outcome for each taxpayer remains unchanged. The affiliate is essentially used as a conduit entity to shift passive investment income offshore and later repatriate that income to Canada tax-free.

It is not intended that taxpayers be permitted to satisfy the six employees test in these circumstances. To ensure the rules operate as intended, Budget 2018 proposes to introduce a rule for the purposes of the investment business definition so that, where income attributable to specific activities carried out by a foreign affiliate accrues to the benefit of a specific taxpayer under a tracking arrangement, those activities carried out to earn such income will be deemed to be a separate business carried on by the affiliate. Each separate business of the affiliate will therefore need to satisfy each relevant condition in the investment business definition, including the six employees test, in order for the affiliate's income from that business to be excluded from FAPI.

This measure will apply to taxation years of a taxpayer's foreign affiliate that begin on or after Budget Day.

Whether one or more separate businesses is carried on is a question of fact that must be determined on the basis of all relevant facts and surrounding circumstances. The introduction of this deeming rule for the purposes of the investment business definition ensures that a foreign affiliate will be treated as having separate businesses where a tracking arrangement exists. Some tracking arrangements may give rise to separate businesses irrespective of whether this new rule applies. The Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) may challenge such arrangements (and other planning with similar effect) on this basis and may also seek to apply existing anti-avoidance rules where appropriate.

Controlled Foreign Affiliate Status

The FAPI of a foreign affiliate of a taxpayer is included in the taxpayer's income on an accrual basis only where the affiliate is a controlled foreign affiliate of the taxpayer. To avoid such accrual taxation, certain groups of Canadian taxpayers have used tracking arrangements to avoid controlled foreign affiliate status (i.e., the group of taxpayers is sufficiently large that they take the position that they do not have, and do not participate in, a controlling interest in the affiliate). Under the tracking arrangement, each taxpayer retains control over its contributed assets and any returns from those assets accrue to its benefit. This is sometimes effected through the establishment of separate cells or segregated accounts that track those contributed assets and respective returns. It is not intended that taxpayers avoid controlled foreign affiliate status, and therefore accrual taxation of FAPI, in these circumstances.

To address this concern, Budget 2018 proposes to deem a foreign affiliate of a taxpayer to be a controlled foreign affiliate of the taxpayer if FAPI attributable to activities of the foreign affiliate accrues to the benefit of the taxpayer under a tracking arrangement. This measure is intended to ensure that each taxpayer involved in such a tracking arrangement – no matter how large the group – is subject to accrual taxation in respect of FAPI attributable to that taxpayer.

This measure will apply to taxation years of a taxpayer's foreign affiliate that begin on or after Budget Day.

This new rule is aimed at providing greater assurance that taxpayers cannot avoid accrual taxation of FAPI using a tracking arrangement. The CRA will continue, in appropriate circumstances, to challenge such arrangements (and other arrangements with similar effect), including through the use of existing anti-avoidance rules.

Trading or Dealing in Indebtedness

Where the principal purpose of a business carried on by a foreign affiliate of a taxpayer is to derive income from trading or dealing in indebtedness, the income from that business is generally treated as FAPI of the affiliate. Similar rules apply to ensure that income from an investment business is generally included in a foreign affiliate's FAPI. Both sets of rules contain exceptions in respect of certain regulated foreign financial institutions.

A condition under the investment business rules requires a taxpayer to satisfy certain minimum capital requirements in order to qualify for the regulated foreign financial institutions exception.

To ensure consistency with the investment business rules, Budget 2018 proposes to add a similar minimum capital requirement to the trading or dealing in indebtedness rules.

This measure will apply to taxation years of a taxpayer's foreign affiliate that begin on or after Budget Day.

Reassessments

After a taxpayer files an income tax return for a taxation year, the CRA is required to perform an initial assessment of tax payable with all due dispatch. For most taxpayers with foreign affiliates, the CRA generally has four years after its initial assessment (referred to as the "normal reassessment period") in which to audit and reassess the taxpayer's tax liability and is generally barred from reassessing beyond that period.

Audits in respect of foreign affiliates are generally time-consuming; they often involve issuing requirements for information located in foreign jurisdictions and requesting the exchange of information from a tax treaty or TIEA partner. In such circumstances, it can be challenging for the CRA to obtain information required for the purposes of auditing and reassessing a taxpayer's tax liability within the normal reassessment period.

A three-year extended reassessment period currently exists in respect of assessments made as a consequence of a transaction involving a taxpayer and a non-resident with whom the taxpayer does not deal at arm's length. (This provision is also discussed under "Reassessment Period – Non-Resident Non-Arm's Length Persons".) Although this three-year extension currently applies to many transactions involving foreign affiliates, it does not apply in all relevant circumstances.

Given the complexity of audits that involve foreign affiliates and in order to ensure that the CRA has an opportunity to properly examine all activities in respect of foreign affiliates that are relevant to the Canadian tax base, Budget 2018 proposes to extend the reassessment period for a taxpayer by three years in respect of income arising in connection with a foreign affiliate of the taxpayer.

This measure will apply to taxation years of a taxpayer that begin on or after Budget Day.

Reporting Requirements

The Income Tax Act contains specific information reporting requirements in respect of foreign affiliates. In general terms, taxpayers (and certain partnerships) are required to file an information return each year in respect of each of their foreign affiliates in the year. These returns contain, among other things, information about amounts included in, and excluded from, FAPI. The provision of this information to the CRA allows for a more efficient administration of the Income Tax Act in respect of income arising in connection with foreign affiliates.

Most entities that file these information returns are corporations. Although a corporate taxpayer is typically required to file its income tax return within six months after the end of its taxation year, a taxpayer's information return in respect of its foreign affiliates is not due until 15 months after the end of its taxation year. As a result, much of the information required to evaluate income of a taxpayer arising in connection with its foreign affiliates is not sent to the CRA until up to nine months after the submission of the taxpayer's income tax return, even though the taxpayer must have most of this information before filing its income tax return in order to properly compute its income tax liability.

Budget 2018 proposes to bring the information return deadline in respect of a taxpayer's foreign affiliates in line with the taxpayer's income tax return deadline by requiring the information returns to be filed within six months after the end of the taxpayer's taxation year.

In order to give taxpayers time to adjust to this change, this measure will apply to taxation years of a taxpayer that begin after 2019.

Reassessment Period – Requirements for Information and Compliance Orders

In administering and enforcing the provisions of the Income Tax Act , the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) has broad general information-gathering powers to request information and examine documents during the course of an audit. In addition, the CRA has a number of specific information-gathering tools available to it, including the ability to issue requirements for information and to obtain compliance orders.

Requirements for information are issued by the CRA. These require a person to provide any information or documents for any purpose related to the administration or enforcement of the Income Tax Act or certain international agreements. Compliance orders are made by a court. These can require a person to provide any necessary assistance, information or document, subject to any conditions the court deems appropriate. Compliance orders can be sought by the CRA where a person has failed to comply with a request made either through its general information gathering powers or through a requirement for information.

A taxpayer may normally be reassessed by the CRA within a fixed period (generally, within three or four years of the CRA's initial assessment of the taxation year in question). After that period, the taxation year may become statute-barred. Currently, where the CRA issues a requirement for foreign-based information and that requirement is contested in court by the recipient of the requirement, a "stop-the-clock" rule provides that the period open for reassessment by the CRA is extended by the amount of time during which the requirement is contested.

No similar rules apply when challenges are made to requirements for information that do not involve foreign-based information or to compliance orders. Contesting requirements for information and compliance orders effectively shortens the period during which the CRA may reassess a taxpayer, thus hampering the ability of the CRA to reassess in a timely fashion and on the basis of complete information.

Budget 2018 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act to introduce a "stop-the-clock" rule for requirements for information generally and for compliance orders. This rule will extend the reassessment period of a taxpayer by the period of time during which the requirement or compliance order is contested. The period will generally start, in the case of a requirement for information, at the time the taxpayer makes an application for judicial review of the requirement or, in the case of a compliance order, at the time the taxpayer opposes, generally by way of notice of appearance, the CRA's application for a compliance order. The period will end upon the final disposition of the application (including any appeals). Related amendments will also be made to conform the rules with respect to requirements for foreign-based information.

This measure will apply in respect of challenges instituted after Royal Assent to the enacting legislation.

Reassessment Period – Non-Resident Non-Arm's Length Persons

After a taxpayer files an income tax return for a taxation year, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) is required to perform an initial examination of the return and to assess tax payable, if any, with all due dispatch. The CRA then normally has a fixed period, generally three or four years, after its initial examination beyond which the CRA is precluded from reassessing the taxpayer.

If a taxpayer incurs a loss in a taxation year and carries the loss back to deduct against the taxpayer's income in a prior taxation year, the CRA has an additional three years to reassess that prior year. This loss carry-back reassessment period is intended to ensure that where a loss arises in a taxation year and is carried back to be used in a prior taxation year, the loss carried back to the prior taxation year cannot become statute-barred before the end of the reassessment period for the taxation year in which the loss arose.

The loss carry-back reassessment period does not take into account the fact that an extended three-year reassessment period exists in respect of reassessments made as a consequence of a transaction involving a taxpayer and a non-resident person with whom the taxpayer does not deal at arm's length. (This provision is also discussed under "Foreign Affiliates – Reassessments".) As a result, for example, there may be situations where the CRA makes a transfer pricing adjustment in respect of a taxation year, but is unable to make a consequential reassessment to a prior taxation year to which the taxpayer has carried back a loss. This is inconsistent with the policy underlying the loss carry-back reassessment period.

Budget 2018 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act to provide the CRA with an additional three years to reassess a prior taxation year of a taxpayer, to the extent the reassessment relates to the adjustment of the loss carryback, where: a reassessment of a taxation year is made as a consequence of a transaction involving a taxpayer and a non-resident person with whom the taxpayer does not deal at arm's length; the reassessment reduces the taxpayer's loss for the taxation year that is available for carryback; and all or any portion of that loss had in fact been carried back to the prior taxation year.

Example :

A loss arises in a taxpayer's 2017 taxation year. The taxpayer carries back this loss and deducts it against income in its 2014 taxation year. In 2023, the CRA determines that the actual amount of the 2017 loss is less than the amount claimed as a consequence of an adjustment to a transaction involving a taxpayer and a non-resident person with whom the taxpayer does not deal at arm's length. The CRA would then be able to reassess the 2014 taxation year to the extent that the reassessment relates to the adjustment of the loss carryback.

This measure will apply in respect of taxation years in which a carried back loss is claimed, where that loss is carried back from a taxation year that ends on or after Budget Day.

Sharing Information for Criminal Matters

Canada has entered into 93 tax treaties and 23 Tax Information Exchange Agreements (TIEAs), and is one of 117 parties to the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters (the "Convention"). Most of the jurisdictions with which Canada has a tax treaty or TIEA are also parties to the Convention. Tax treaties, TIEAs and the Convention provide for the sharing of tax-related information for both civil and criminal tax law purposes, subject to the confidentiality provisions of the agreement at issue.

In addition, Canada has entered into numerous mutual legal assistance agreements. Mutual legal assistance agreements provide for the sharing of information for criminal law purposes.

These international instruments facilitate the administration and enforcement of the tax and other laws of both Canada and its international partners. The sharing of information internationally for the investigation, prosecution and suppression of serious criminal offences, both tax-related and non-tax-related, is vital to the global fight against serious crime and is consistent with the Government's commitments to address global tax evasion and to improve the fairness of the tax system.

Sharing Tax Information Relating to Tax Offences

As noted above, Canada is obligated to share certain information, including information to be used in respect of tax-related offences, under its tax treaties and TIEAs, and the Convention. The Canada Revenue Agency is responsible for the sharing of tax-related information under the terms of these agreements.

To facilitate the sharing of information, Budget 2018 proposes to allow the legal tools available under the Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters Act (MLACMA) to be used with respect to the sharing of criminal tax information under Canada's tax treaties and TIEAs, and the Convention. These tools include the ability for the Attorney General to obtain court orders to gather and send information. The Canada Revenue Agency will continue to be involved in sharing tax information internationally and will work with the Department of Justice, which administers the MLACMA.

To give effect to this measure, legislative amendments may be proposed to the MLACMA, the Income Tax Act , Part IX of the Excise Tax Act (in relation to the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax) and the Excise Act, 2001 (in relation to excise duties on products such as tobacco and alcohol). The Government intends to propose that any such amendments come into force upon Royal Assent to the enacting legislation.

Sharing Tax Information Relating to Serious Non-Tax Offences

Canada's mutual legal assistance agreements provide for a wide range of international cooperation in criminal matters. Canada also has the ability to enter into case-specific arrangements to give effect to a request for mutual legal assistance. The MLACMA gives the Attorney General the authority to obtain gathering and sending orders for various types of information in relation to serious non-tax offences, but tax information cannot currently be obtained or shared through this process. Therefore, while many of Canada's mutual legal assistance partners are able to share tax information in response to a request from Canada for mutual legal assistance, Canada lacks the legal authority to reciprocate.

Budget 2018 proposes to enable the sharing of tax information with Canada's mutual legal assistance partners in respect of acts that, if committed in Canada, would constitute terrorism, organized crime, money laundering, criminal proceeds or designated substance offences (i.e., offences listed in section 462.48 of the Criminal Code ).

A similar issue relates to the authority of the Attorney General to apply for a court order to allow Canadian police officers to obtain taxpayer information under the Income Tax Act for an investigation or prosecution of those offences. Currently, there is no ability to obtain similar confidential information under Part IX of the Excise Tax Act or the Excise Act, 2001 .

To address this inconsistency, Budget 2018 also proposes to enable confidential information under Part IX of the Excise Tax Act and the Excise Act, 2001 to be disclosed to Canadian police officers in respect of those offences where such disclosure is currently permitted in respect of taxpayer information under the Income Tax Act .

To give effect to these measures, legislative amendments may be proposed to the MLACMA, the Criminal Code, the Income Tax Act , Part IX of the Excise Tax Act and the Excise Act, 2001 . The Government intends to propose that any such amendments come into force upon Royal Assent to the enacting legislation.

Sales and Excise Tax Measures

GST/HST and Investment Limited Partnerships

On September 8, 2017, the Government released draft legislative and regulatory proposals relating to the application of the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) to investment limited partnerships. These proposals would clarify that GST/HST is payable on the fair market value of management and administrative services provided to an investment limited partnership by the general partner of the investment limited partnership where consideration becomes due or is paid on or after September 8, 2017. The proposals would also make investment limited partnerships "investment plans" under the GST/HST and extend the special HST rules currently applicable to investment plans to investment limited partnerships effective January 1, 2019. In addition, the proposals would provide GST/HST relief to investment limited partnerships with non-resident investors where certain conditions are met.

Budget 2018 confirms the Government's intention to proceed with these proposals with the following changes:

First, Budget 2018 proposes to modify the September 8, 2017 proposal so that the GST/HST applies to management and administrative services rendered by the general partner on or after September 8, 2017, and not to management and administrative services rendered by the general partner before September 8, 2017 unless the general partner charged GST/HST in respect of such services before that date. Budget 2018 also proposes that the GST/HST be generally payable on the fair market value of management and administrative services in the period in which these services are rendered.

Second, Budget 2018 proposes to allow an investment limited partnership to make an election to advance the application of the special HST rules as of January 1, 2018.

Tobacco Taxation

Tobacco taxation is recognized as one of the most effective policy instruments to reduce smoking prevalence and reduce youth uptake of tobacco products. The rates of excise duty on tobacco products are currently set to automatically increase every five years to account for inflation. Under this approach, tobacco excise duty rates would be adjusted on December 1, 2019.

Budget 2018 proposes to advance the existing inflationary adjustments for tobacco excise duty rates to occur on an annual basis rather than every five years. To ensure consistency in the excise framework, inflationary adjustments will take effect on April 1 of every year, starting in 2019. Effective the day after Budget Day, tobacco excise duty rates will be adjusted to account for inflation since the last inflationary adjustment in 2014.

Budget 2018 also proposes to increase the excise duty rates by an additional $1 per carton of 200 cigarettes, along with corresponding increases to the excise duty rates on other tobacco products.

Inventories of cigarettes held by manufacturers, importers, wholesalers and retailers at the end of Budget Day will be subject to an inventory tax of $0.011468 per cigarette (subject to certain exemptions). Manufacturers, importers, wholesalers and retailers should refer to the cigarette inventory tax mechanism in the Excise Act, 2001 and Canada Revenue Agency publications for more information. Taxpayers will have until April 30, 2018 to file returns and pay the cigarette inventory tax.

Table 4 provides further information on proposed tobacco excise duty rates. These rate changes will be effective after Budget Day.

Cannabis Taxation

Excise Duty Framework

The Government is committed to providing regulated and restricted access to cannabis to keep it out of the hands of youth and keep profits out of the hands of criminals. This will entail keeping duties low, and working with the provinces and territories to maintain a coordinated cross-country approach to taxation. In November 2017, the Government released for consultation a proposed excise duty framework for cannabis products that helps support these objectives.

Budget 2018 proposes a new federal excise duty framework for cannabis products to be introduced as part of the Excise Act, 2001. The duty will generally apply to all products available for legal purchase, which at the outset of legalization will include fresh and dried cannabis, cannabis oils, and seeds and seedlings for home cultivation. Cannabis cultivators and manufacturers will be required to obtain a cannabis licence from the Canada Revenue Agency and remit the excise duty, where applicable. The framework will come into effect when cannabis for non-medical purposes becomes available for legal retail sale.

Excise duties will be imposed on federally-licenced producers ("cannabis licensees") at the higher of a flat rate applied on the quantity of cannabis contained in a final product and a percentage of the dutiable amount of the product as sold by the producer. The dutiable amount generally represents the portion of the producer's sales price that does not include the cannabis duties under the Excise Act, 2001 . The proposed excise duty framework will be applied as follows:

A flat rate duty will be imposed, at the time of packaging for final retail sale, on the quantity of cannabis flowering and non-flowering material (generally referred to as "flower" and "trim," respectively), as well as on cannabis seeds and seedlings (e.g., in the case of home cultivation).

The flat rate duty will be imposed on a dollar-per-gram basis, or dollar-per-seed/seedling basis in the case of seeds/seedlings.

A lower rate per gram will be applied for trim as compared to flower.

A product will generally be considered to be "packaged" by a cannabis licensee when it is put in a container intended for sale to a final consumer at the retail level.

At the time of delivery of a cannabis product by the cannabis licensee that packaged it to a purchaser (e.g., a provincially-authorized distributor), an ad valorem rate will also be imposed on the dutiable amount of the transaction.

Cannabis licensees selling to purchasers will be liable to pay duty at the higher of the flat rate or the ad valorem rate on the product. The applicable duty will only become payable at the time of delivery to a purchaser.

The cannabis licensee who packaged the cannabis product for final retail sale will be liable to pay the applicable excise duty.

All cannabis products that will be removed from the premises of a cannabis licensee to enter into the Canadian market for retail sale will be required to have an excise stamp. Excise stamps will have specified colours indicating the provincial or territorial market in which it is intended to be sold. It will be the responsibility of the cannabis licensee who packaged the cannabis product to determine and apply the appropriate excise stamp before its entry into the duty-paid Canadian market.

The excise duty framework will generally apply to cannabis products that contain Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the primary psychoactive compound of cannabis. However, packaged products that contain concentrations of no more than 0.3 per cent THC, and consequently have little to no associated psychoactive effects, would generally not be subject to the excise duty under the proposed framework. Pharmaceutical products approved by Health Canada with a Drug Identification Number (DIN) that are derived from cannabis and that can only be acquired through a prescription will also not be subject to the excise duty.

The Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) basic groceries rules of the Excise Tax Act will be amended to ensure that any sales of cannabis products that would otherwise be considered as basic groceries are subject to the GST/HST in the same way as sales of other types of cannabis products. In addition, relieving rules for various agricultural products will be changed to ensure that sales of cannabis products, including seeds and seedlings, will not be relieved under these rules.

Federal-Provincial-Territorial Taxation Coordination

In December 2017, the federal government reached an agreement with most provincial and territorial governments on a coordinated cannabis taxation framework for the initial two years after legalization. As part of the coordinated framework, 75 per cent of the taxation revenues from a combined $1 per gram / 10 per cent excise duty rate will flow to participating provinces and territories, with the federal government receiving the remaining 25 per cent. The federal portion of cannabis excise duty revenues will be capped at $100 million annually for the first two years after legalization, with any additional cannabis excise duty revenues being distributed to the participating provinces and territories.

In practice, the coordinated framework provides for the application of a federal excise duty as well as an additional excise duty in respect of provinces and territories. The additional excise duty in respect of a province or territory will apply in provinces and territories that agree to participate in the coordinated framework and will apply on the same tax base as, and in fixed proportion to, the federal rate.

However, a province or territory may ask for an adjustment to the additional excise duty under the coordinated framework to reflect differences between the sales tax rate applicable to cannabis in the province or territory and the highest prevailing general sales tax rate, or rate of the provincial component of the HST, among provinces and territories.

All of the duties referred to above are proposed to be legislated under the Excise Act, 2001 .

Proposed excise duty rates (excluding any adjustments to account for differences in sales tax rates) within the coordinated framework are set out in Table 5.

Transitional Rules

The cannabis excise duty framework is proposed to be in place by the time cannabis for non-medical purposes becomes accessible for legal retail sale. The framework is proposed to be implemented to ensure the equal duty treatment of cannabis products destined for the retail market regardless of when that product was produced and/or transported to distributors/retailers.

The Canada Revenue Agency will begin accepting applications for cannabis licences and will issue excise stamps in advance of the legalization date.

Duty will become payable for cannabis licensees on any cannabis products they have already delivered in advance of the legalization date for eventual retail sale, with the exclusion of cannabis delivered to final consumers through the mail in accordance with the Access to Cannabis for Medical Purposes Regulations .

On or after the date of cannabis legalization for non-medical purposes, all cannabis products delivered through the mail in accordance with the Cannabis Act will be subject to the appropriate duty.

Proposed Consultations on Tax Measures

Consultations on the GST/HST Holding Corporation Rules

A Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST) rule, commonly referred to as the "holding corporation rule", generally allows a parent corporation to claim input tax credits to recover GST/HST paid in respect of expenses that relate to another corporation. This rule provides that, where a parent corporation resident in Canada incurs expenses that can reasonably be regarded as being in relation to shares or indebtedness of a commercial operating corporation (a corporation all or substantially all of the property of which is for consumption, use or supply in commercial activities) and the parent corporation is related to the commercial operating corporation, the expenses are generally deemed to have been incurred in relation to commercial activities of the parent corporation.

The Government intends to consult on certain aspects of the holding corporation rule, particularly with respect to the limitation of the rule to corporations and the required degree of relationship between the parent corporation and the commercial operating corporation. At the same time, the Government intends to clarify which expenses of the parent corporation that are in respect of shares or indebtedness of a related commercial operating corporation qualify for input tax credits under the rule.

Consultation documents and draft legislative proposals regarding these issues will be released for public comment in the near future.

Previously Announced Measures

Budget 2018 confirms the Government's intention to proceed with the following previously announced tax and related measures, as modified to take into account consultations and deliberations since their release:

Measures confirmed in Budget 2016 relating to the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax joint venture election;

Income tax measures announced in Budget 2016 expanding tax support for electrical vehicle charging stations and electrical energy storage equipment;

The income tax measure announced in Budget 2016 on information-reporting requirements for certain dispositions of an interest in a life insurance policy;

Technical income tax legislative amendments released on September 16, 2016, relating to a division of a corporation under foreign laws, and to the requirements to qualify as a prescribed share;

The income tax measure announced in Budget 2017 to support the establishment of a tax-exempt Memorial Grant for First Responders (the Community Heroes benefit);

The income tax measure announced on May 18, 2017 for additional tax relief for Canadian armed forces personnel and police officers;

Remaining legislative and regulatory proposals released on September 8, 2017 relating to the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax;

The income tax measure announced on October 16, 2017 to lower the small business tax rate from 10.5 per cent to 10 per cent, effective January 1, 2018, and to 9 per cent, effective January 1, 2019, which was included in a Notice of Ways and Means Motion tabled on October 24, 2017 along with related amendments to the gross-up amount and dividend tax credit for taxable dividends;

The income tax measure announced on October 24, 2017 in the Fall Economic Statementto provide for the indexing of the Canada Child Benefit amounts as of July 1, 2018 instead of July 1, 2020; and

Income tax measures released on December 13, 2017 to address income sprinkling.

Budget 2018 also reaffirms the Government's commitment to move forward as required with technical amendments to improve the certainty of the tax system.



<<< source: nwmm-amvm-01-en.html >>>

Notice of Ways and Means Motion to Amend the Income Tax Act and Other Related Legislation

That it is expedient to amend the Income Tax Act (the "Act") and other related legislation as follows:

Canada Workers Benefit

Medical Expense Tax Credit — Eligible Expenditures

Registered Disability Savings Plan — Qualifying Plan Holders

Deductibility of Employee Contributions to the Enhanced Portion of the Quebec Pension Plan

Child Benefits

Status Indians

Provincial/Territorial Data Access

Charities — Miscellaneous Technical Issues

Municipalities as Eligible Donees

Eligible donee

Reduction of liability for penalties

Universities Outside Canada

Mineral Exploration Tax Credit for Flow-Through Share Investors

Reporting Requirements for Trusts

Passive Investment Income

Tax Support for Clean Energy

Artificial Losses Using Equity-Based Financial Arrangements

Stop-Loss Rule on Share Repurchase Transactions

At-Risk Rules for Tiered Partnerships

Health and Welfare Trusts

Cross-Border Surplus Stripping using Partnerships and Trusts

Foreign Affiliates

Reassessment Period – Requirements for Information and Compliance Orders

Reassessment Period – Non-Resident Non-Arm's Length Persons



<<< source: nwmm-amvm-02-en.html >>>

Notice of Ways and Means Motion to Amend the Excise Tax Act

That it is expedient to amend the Excise Tax Act as follows:

GST/HST and Investment Limited Partnerships



<<< source: nwmm-amvm-03-en.html >>>

Notice of Ways and Means Motion to Amend the Excise Act, 2001 and Other Related Legislation

That it is expedient to amend the Excise Act, 2001 and other related legislation as follows:

Tobacco Taxation

Excise Act, 2001

Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 1

Economic Action Plan 2014 Act, No. 2

Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1

Application

Cannabis Taxation



<<< source: nwmm-amvm-04-en.html >>>

Draft Amendments to Various GST/HST Regulations

GST/HST and Investment Limited Partnerships

Financial Services and Financial Institutions (GST/HST) Regulations

Selected Listed Financial Institutions Attribution Method (GST/HST) Regulations

Transitional Rules for Investment Limited Partnerships



<<< source: overview-apercu-txt-en.html >>>

Overview - Text Version

Chart 1

Chart 2

Chart 2a Real Household Consumption Growth and Consumer Confidence The data from chart 2 cannot be released due to legal, licensing, or copryright reasons.

Chart 3

Chart 4 - Budgetary Balance

Chart 5
