<<< source: home-accueil-en.html >>>

<<< source: toc-tdm-en.html >>>

Budget 2016

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

Table of Contents

A New Approach

The Promise  of Progress

An Uncertain Future

The Rise of Inequality

Realizing Change

Restoring Hope, Rewarding Hard Work

Positioning Canada in a Shifting World  Economy

A Long-Term Plan for Growth

Toward More Inclusive Growth

Conclusion

The Path Forward

Introduction

Global Economic Developments and  Outlook

Global Growth Has Slowed

Financial Market Volatility Has Risen

Commodity Prices Have Fallen Sharply

Canada's Economic Situation

The Effect of Low Oil Prices on  National Income, Investment and Employment

Positive Developments Outside  the Energy Sector

The Conditions for More Robust Growth  Going Forward

Outstanding Risks to the Economic  Outlook

Canada's Fiscal Strength

Taking Action to Grow the Economy

Economic Impacts of Measures

A Responsible Approach  to Fiscal Management

A Responsible Return to  Balanced Budgets

Repealing the Federal Balanced Budget Act

Chapter 1 – Help for the  Middle Class

Introduction

Strengthening the Middle Class

Introducing the Canada Child Benefit

How Canadian Families Will Benefit  From the New Canada Child Benefit

Eliminating Income Splitting for  Couples With Children

Eliminating the Children's Fitness  Tax Credit and the Children's Arts Tax Credit

Helping Young Canadians Succeed

Making Post-Secondary Education More  Affordable

Enhancing Canada Student Grants

Making Student Debt More Manageable

Introducing a Flat-Rate Student  Contribution

Eliminating the Education Tax Credit  and the Textbook Tax Credit

Helping Youth Obtain Valuable  Work Experience

A Renewed Youth Employment Strategy

Prime Minister's Youth Council

Youth Service

Expert Panel on Youth Employment

Increasing Co-op Placements and  Strengthening Work Integrated Learning..

Improving Employment Insurance

Expanding Access to Employment  Insurance for New Entrants and   Re-entrants

Reducing the Employment Insurance  Waiting Period From Two Weeks to One

Extending the Working While on Claim  Pilot Project

Simplifying Job Search  Responsibilities for Employment Insurance Claimants

Extending Employment Insurance  Regular Benefits in Affected Regions

Extending the Maximum Duration of  Work-Sharing Agreements

Making Employment Insurance Service  Delivery More Responsive

Enhancing Access to Employment  Insurance Call Centres

Strengthening the Integrity of the  Employment Insurance Program

Investing in Skills and Training

Enhancing Investments in Training

Strengthening Union-Based  Apprenticeship Training

Investing in Adult Basic Education in  the North

Increasing the Northern  Residents Deduction

Supporting Flexible Work Arrangements

Labour Market Information  for Canadians

Introducing a Teacher and Early  Childhood Educator School Supply Tax Credit

Chapter 2 – Growth for the Middle Class

Introduction

Investing in Infrastructure to Create  Jobs and Prosperity for the Middle Class

Phase 1 of Canada's New  Infrastructure Plan

Building Strong Cities Through Investments  in Public Transit

Investing in Green Infrastructure

Building Capacity in Municipalities to Address Climate Change

Funding Innovative Green Municipal Projects

Developing Community Capacity for Asset Management Best Practices

Adaptation and Climate Resilient  Infrastructure

Sustaining Healthy Communities Through a New Clean Water      and Wastewater Fund

Building Stronger Communities

Expanding Affordable Housing

Supporting Early Learning and  Child Care

Investing in Cultural and  Recreational Infrastructure

Assisting Homeowners Affected by  Pyrrhotite

Improving Access for Rural  Communities to the Digital Economy

Revitalizing Federal Public  Infrastructure Across Canada

Accelerating Federal Infrastructure  Investments

Supporting Water Infrastructure in  Saskatchewan

Improving Rail Service

Supporting Ferry Services in Atlantic  Canada

Building A More  Innovative Country

Strengthening Science and Research

Strategic Infrastructure Investments  at Post-Secondary Institutions

Strengthening Canada's World-Class  Research Capacity and Excellence

Ensuring Federal Support for Research  Is Strategic and Effective

Supporting Canada's Continued  Leadership in Space

Growing the Agriculture and Agri-Food Sector

Investing in Agricultural Science

Supporting Business Growth  and Innovation

Strengthening Innovation Networks  and Clusters

Helping High-Impact Firms Scale Up

Supporting a Strong and Innovative  Automotive Sector

Developing a Canadian Cluster Map to  Identify and Build on Regional Strengths

Helping Small and Medium-Sized  Companies to Innovate and Grow

Strengthening Canada's Network of  Accelerators and Incubators

Linking Canadian Technology Companies  to Global Markets and Expertise

Supporting Business Innovation  Through Optics and Photonics Solutions.

Marketing Canada as a Premier  Tourism Destination

Strengthening Northern Economic  Development

Mineral Exploration Tax Credit

Expanding Trade Opportunities

Supporting Manufacturers Through  Tariff Relief

Supporting Ferry Fleet Renewal

Strengthening Canada's Response to  Unfair Trade

Chapter 3 – A Better Future for Indigenous Peoples

Introduction

National Inquiry Into Missing  and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls

Engaging With Indigenous Peoples

Improving Primary and  Secondary Education for First Nations Children

Fostering Better Learning Environments  by Investing in First Nations Schools

Ensuring the Safety and Well-Being of  First Nations Children

Aboriginal Skills and Employment  Training Strategy

Investing in Social Infrastructure to  Create Inclusive Growth

Improving Housing in First  Nations Communities

Supporting Northern and Inuit Housing

Providing Safe Shelter for Victims  of Violence

Supporting Early Learning and  Child Care

Investing in Cultural and  Recreational Infrastructure

Improving Community Health Care  Facilities On Reserve

Investing in Green Infrastructure On  Reserve

Monitoring of Water On Reserve

Strengthening On Reserve Water and  Wastewater Infrastructure

Addressing Waste Management for First  Nations Communities

Investing in Community Infrastructure

Métis Nation Economic Development  Strategy

Renewing the Urban  Aboriginal Strategy

Assisting Indigenous Peoples Facing  the Criminal Justice System

Aboriginal Languages Initiative

Support for the First Nations Finance  Authority

Supporting First Nations Fishing Enterprises

Chapter 4 –A Clean Growth  Economy

Introduction

Investing In Clean Technology

Accelerating Clean Technology  Development

Investing in Electric Vehicle and  Alternative Transportation Fuels Infrastructure

Expanding Tax Support for Clean Energy

Investing in World-Leading  Researchers in Clean and Sustainable Technology

Increasing Federal Support for Clean  Technology Activities in All Regions

Advancing Regional Electricity  Cooperation

Developing Cleaner Oil and  Gas Technologies

Improving Data on the Clean  Technology Sector

Securing A Cleaner, More Sustainable  Environment

Addressing Climate Change and  Air Pollution

Supporting the Pan-Canadian Framework  on Clean Growth and Climate Change

Moving to a Cleaner Transportation  Sector

Supporting Energy Efficiency and  Renewable Energy Development

Adapting to Climate Change Impacts

Ensuring International Environmental  Cooperation

Reducing Air Pollution

Tax Treatment of Emission Allowance  Regimes

Protecting and Restoring Canada's  Ecosystems and Natural Heritage

Providing Free Access and Expanding  the National Park System

Protecting Marine and Coastal Areas

Investing in Ocean and Freshwater  Research

Improving Great Lakes Water Quality  and Ecosystem Health

Managing Transboundary Water Issues

Addressing the Threat of Pollutants  From the Manolis L

Strengthening Canada's Environmental  Assessment Processes

Restoring Trust in Environmental  Assessment

Supporting the Canadian Environmental  Assessment Agency

Taking Stock of the Arctic  Environment

Improving Regulatory Review Processes  for Major Projects in the North

Chapter 5 – An Inclusive and Fair Canada

Introduction

Improving the Quality of Life for Seniors

Increasing the Guaranteed Income  Supplement for Single Seniors

Enhancing the Canada Pension Plan

Restoring the Eligibility Ages of the  Old Age Security Program

Increased Support for Senior Couples  Living Apart

Ensuring Seniors Benefits Keep Pace  With the Cost of Living

Supporting Canada's Veterans

Enhancing Services for Veterans

Financial Support for Veterans

Last Post Fund

Commemoration

Invictus Games

Strengthening Canada's Health Care  System

Canadian Foundation for Healthcare  Improvement

Canada Health Infoway

Expanding Nutrition North Canada

Enhancing Food Safety in Canada

Canadian Partnership Against Cancer

Improving Heart Health for Women

Tackling Men's Health

Improving Immunization  Coverage Rates

Harmonization of Concussion  Management Guidelines

Improving Canada's Justice System

Taking Action Against Guns and Gangs

Reinstating the Court Challenges  Program of Canada

Ensuring Access to Justice

A More Efficient Federal Court System

Investing in Arts and Culture

Investing in Arts and Cultural  Organizations

Showcasing Canada's Cultural  Industries to the World

Supporting National Museums

Enhancing Public Safety

Office of the Community Outreach and  Counter-Radicalization Coordinator

Strengthening Heavy Urban Search and  Rescue

Royal Canadian Mounted Police  Vancouver Laboratory Relocation

Reopening the Kitsilano Canadian  Coast Guard Facility

Strengthening the Security of  Government of Canada Networks and Cyber Systems

Enhancing the Safety of Railways  and the Transportation of Dangerous Goods

Improving Motor Vehicle Safety

Chapter 6 – Canada in the World

Introduction

Restoring and Renewing International  Assistance

Increasing the International  Assistance Envelope

Promoting International Peace  and Security

Expanding Immigration

Expanding Canada's Intake of  Syrian Refugees

Reducing Application Processing Times

Achieving Higher Permanent  Resident Admissions

Improving Export Verifications

Defending Canada

Renewing Major Equipment for the  Canadian Armed Forces

Chapter 7 – Open and  Transparent Government

Introduction

Improving Service for Canadians

Improving Client Services at the  Canada Revenue Agency

Government of Canada Service Strategy

Opening Government and Engaging Canadians

Enhancing Access to Information

Expanding Open Data Initiatives

Electoral Reform

Parliamentary Approval of Government  Borrowing

Better Government for Canadians

Focusing on Outcomes

Strengthening the Public Service

Reviewing Spending and the Tax System

Investing in Government  Information Technology

Transforming Government Back  Office Systems

Bargaining in Good Faith With Federal  Government Unions

Increasing Capacity at Status of  Women Canada

Treasury Board Program  Integrity Process

Chapter 8 – Tax Fairness and a Strong Financial Sector

Introduction

Making the Tax System More Fair

Improving Tax Compliance

Cracking Down on Tax Evasion and  Combatting Tax Avoidance

Enhancing Tax Collections

Enhancing Tax Integrity

Strengthening International Tax  Integrity

Enhancing Domestic Tax Integrity

Other Tax Measures

Small Business Income Tax Rate

Eligible Capital Property

Donations of Real Estate and Shares  of Private Corporations

Accelerated Capital Cost Allowance for  Liquefied Natural Gas Facilities.

Restoring the Labour-Sponsored  Venture Capital Corporations Tax Credit

Strengthening the  Financial Sector to Support Economic Growth

Enhancing Consumer Protection

Renewing Financial Sector Legislation

Introducing a Bank Recapitalization  "Bail-in" Regime

Studying Housing and Household  Indebtedness

Monitoring Systemic Risks to the  Financial System

Supporting a Robust Credit Union  System Across Canada

Enhancing the Strong Regulatory and  Supervisory Framework for Federally Regulated Pension Plans

Ensuring the Ongoing Effective  Management of Canada's Finances

Annex 1 – Details of Economic and Fiscal Projections

Annex 2 – Economic Impacts of Budget Measures

Annex 3 – Debt Management Strategy for 2016–17

Tax Measures: Table of Contents

Tax Measures: Supplementary   Information

Tax Measures: Notices of Ways   and Means Motions

Tax Measures: Explanatory Notes – Eligible Capital Property



<<< source: brief-bref-en.html >>>

Strengthening The Middle Class

A strong economy starts with a strong middle class. When you have an economy that works for the middle class, you have a country that works for everyone.

When the middle class thrives, it creates more than just good jobs and opportunity; it can drive real change.

Canada Child Benefit

Restoring Hope for the Middle Class

Measures

Canada Child Benefit

The Government will introduce a new Canada Child Benefit that will be simpler, tax-free, more generous and better targeted than the existing system of federal child benefits. About 9 out of 10 Canadian families will receive higher benefits under the new system, and hundreds of thousands of children will be lifted out of poverty.

Budget 2016 proposes to replace the current system with the Canada Child Benefit, which will provide 9 out of 10 families with more generous benefits, and lift hundreds of thousands of children out of poverty.

The Middle Class Tax Cut

A strengthened middle class means hard-working Canadians can look forward to a good standard of living and a bright future for their children.

On December 7, 2015, as one of its first actions, the Government cut taxes for nearly 9 million Canadians by reducing the second personal income tax rate to 20.5 per cent from 22 per cent. Single individuals who benefit will see an average tax reduction of $330 every year, and couples who benefit will see an average tax reduction of $540 every year.

Helping Young Canadians Succeed

The Government is committed to supporting opportunities for young Canadians by ensuring that they have the skills and experience they need to succeed.

Budget 2016 will ensure that post-secondary education remains affordable for students from low- and middle-income families and that debt loads are manageable.

In addition to doubling the size of the Canada Summer Jobs program, the Government is investing in young Canadians by making it easier for them to join the workforce through enhancements to the Youth Employment Strategy and investments to strengthen co-op and on-the-job learning opportunities.

Employment Insurance

The Government is taking immediate action to improve the Employment Insurance (EI) system to make sure Canadians get the help they need, when they need it.

To reduce the period of time that out-of-work Canadians are without income, Budget 2016 proposes to reduce the EI waiting period from two weeks to one week, effective January 1, 2017. Improvements to EI service delivery will also ensure that Canadians get their benefits as quickly as possible.

Certain regions have been particularly hard hit by the falling commodity prices, and unemployment in those areas has increased sharply. Budget 2016 will help workers and their families while they seek new jobs by temporarily extending EI benefits in those regions.

Creating Jobs and Prosperity for the Middle Class

Investing in infrastructure creates good, well-paying jobs that can help the middle class grow and prosper today. In Budget 2016, the Government will implement an historic plan to invest more than $120 billion in infrastructure over 10 years, to better meet the needs of Canadians and better position Canada’s economy for the future.

Phase 1 of the Government’s long-term infrastructure plan provides $11.9 billion over five years to immediately invest in the infrastructure Canadians need—to modernize and rehabilitate public transit, water and wastewater systems, provide affordable housing, and protect infrastructure systems from the effects of climate change.

Helping Young Canadians Succeed

An Innovative and Clean Economy

New ideas drive economic growth. That’s why Budget 2016 defines a new vision for Canada’s economy as a centre of global innovation. Protecting the environment and growing the economy go hand in hand.

Investments in Budget 2016 will start Canada on the right path, through support for leading-edge research and for innovative and job-creating businesses.

Measures

Enhancing Canada’s Knowledge Advantage

Budget 2016 provides $2 billion over three years, starting in 2016–17, for a new Post-Secondary Institutions Strategic Investment Fund. This initiative will support up to 50 per cent of the eligible costs of infrastructure projects at post-secondary institutions and affiliated research and commercialization organizations, in collaboration with provinces and territories.

Strengthening Innovation Networks and Clusters

Connections between knowledge producers and users—including researchers and firms—and collaboration within supply chains driven by market opportunities create value through innovation and support economic growth. To help address these challenges, Budget 2016 will make available up to $800 million over four years to support innovation networks and clusters, including support for initiatives delivered under the Industrial Research Assistance Program.

Supporting the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change

Budget 2016 will provide $2 billion over two years, starting in 2017–18, to establish the Low Carbon Economy Fund. The Fund will support provincial and territorial actions that reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Investing in Ocean and Freshwater Research

Oceans and waterways are vital to Canada’s economy. They connect us to the world and are a resource for coastal and Indigenous communities. Budget 2016 will provide up to $197.1 million over five years, on a cash basis, to Fisheries and Oceans Canada to increase ocean and freshwater science monitoring and research activities and to provide support for the Experimental Lakes Area in Northwestern Ontario.

An Inclusive and Fair Canada

Canada’s strength lies in its diversity. That is why the Government set out an agenda to help all Canadians to build better lives and contribute to and share in the prosperity of the country.

Budget 2016 delivers on this agenda, with investments for those who need it most, including seniors, Indigenous peoples and veterans.

Measures

Veterans

Canada’s veterans have dedicated their lives to the defence of their country, and they deserve our gratitude, respect and support. Budget 2016 will give back to those who have given so much in service to all Canadians by restoring critical access to services for veterans as well as ensuring the long-term financial security of disabled veterans.

Seniors

By making significant new investments that support seniors in their retirement years through increased benefits, the Government is ensuring that Canadian seniors have a dignified, comfortable and secure retirement.

Indigenous Peoples

Strong families and communities are fundamental to the economic success of Indigenous peoples. The Government is committed to working in partnership with Indigenous peoples to break down the barriers that have for too long held back individuals and communities from reaching their full potential.

Health Care

Canada’s publicly funded, universal health care system is a source of national pride. It reflects Canadian values, and Canadians’ generous nature and commitment to helping each other in times of need. Budget 2016 strengthens the health care system so that it may better meet the needs of patients, and support the shift in the delivery of care into homes and communities.

Investing in Arts and Cultural Organizations

Investing in Canadian cultural and creative industries allows Canadian artists to share their stories at home and abroad. Budget 2016 provides $1.9 billion over five years to Canada’s cultural sector, which will help to create jobs, strengthen the economy, and ensure the unique Canadian perspective is shared with the world.

Canada in the World

Canada’s diversity and connections to the world are among its greatest assets and contribute to growing the middle class.

Measures

Immigration

Canadians welcome those who want to come to Canada and contribute to our country’s success. To make immigrants feel more welcome, Budget 2016 proposes to reduce processing times to prioritize family reunification, and increase funding for settlement programs to better welcome newcomers to their new home in Canada.

International Aid

The Government is committed to strengthening Canada’s place in the world by ensuring that Canada’s international assistance priorities are focused on poverty reduction and by promoting peace and security.

Peace and Security

The Government is steadfast in its commitment to providing greater security for Canadians. Budget 2016 supports those who defend Canada and promote peace by ensuring that Canadian Forces members are equipped to do their jobs and by improving facilities where they live, work and train.

Open and Transparent Government

Making government more open, enhancing tax fairness and investing for long-term growth

Measures

Open and Transparent

Canadians expect their government to be open, honest and accountable. They expect their government to represent their interests and deliver the services they need quickly and effectively. Above all, Canadians expect their government to deliver real, meaningful results, while ensuring that their tax dollars are spent fairly, efficiently and responsibly.

Tax Fairness

As a matter of fairness for all taxpayers, the Government is committed to preventing underground economic activity, tax evasion and aggressive tax planning. That is why Budget 2016 provides increased resources to ensure more effective administration and enforcement of tax laws. Budget 2016 also proposes actions to improve the integrity of Canada’s tax system on both the international and domestic fronts, to give Canadians greater confidence that the system is fair to everyone.

Canada’s Fiscal Strength

The Government will make necessary investments in growing and strengthening the middle class, and help those working hard to join it. The Government has the capacity and the willingness to act, and there is growing international support for its approach.



<<< source: introduction-en.html >>>

Introduction - A New Approach

In 2015, Canadians were presented with a plan    for real change.

David and Neera are two Canadians looking for    that change.

David grew up in Canada and has seen the sense    of optimism for his family's future—one enjoyed by his parents and    grandparents—steadily erode. Though he loved the community he lived in as a    child, when it came time to buy his own family home, he had to look    elsewhere. His old neighbourhood simply wasn't affordable.

Neera came to Canada as a  student. But she worries about whether they will be able to afford to send  their own children to university. Paying for the basics is sometimes tough,  even though she and David both work full-time.

Canadians like David  and Neera are willing to work hard to build a better future for themselves and  their children, and they want a government that will work with them to make  that goal a reality.

Budget 2016 is a  clear step toward that future. It offers immediate help to those who need it  most, and lays the groundwork for sustained, inclusive economic growth that  will benefit families like David and Neera's in the years to come.

Most important, Budget  2016 focuses squarely on Canadians and the things that matter most to them.  Things like growing the economy, creating jobs, strengthening the middle class  and helping those working hard to join it.

Every Canadian  deserves a real and fair chance at success. Budget 2016 delivers the first  steps in that promise—for David, Neera and all Canadians.

The Promise  of Progress

For generations, Canadians worked hard, secure in the belief  that their hard work would be rewarded. They trusted that in exchange for their  honest efforts, they would realize greater opportunities for themselves, and  for their families.

Older Canadians, young Canadians, new Canadians—all believed  that with hard work, everyone could build a better life: find a job, get an  education, build a family.

It was an era of optimism, an era of new scientific  discovery and economic growth, and a time of nation-building. Projects that needed  the vision and leadership of government came to life. From the Canadian Pacific  Railway opening up the West, to the St. Lawrence Seaway serving as a foundation  for prosperity in Ontario and Quebec, to the Trans-Canada Highway, airports,  pipelines and canals—these projects enabled Canada to develop its natural  resources, power cities, and connect Canadians to each other and the world.

This sense of optimism, paired with government policies that  strengthened the middle class, helped to make Canada the country that it is  today.

It helped build the many strong communities that Canadians  like David and Neera are justly proud to call home.

An Uncertain Future

In the decades since, however, the benefits of economic  growth have been shared by fewer and fewer Canadians.

Over the past 30 years, the median wage income has barely  risen.

For younger Canadians, this unacceptable trend has been a reality  for their entire working lives. David, who just turned 40, is finding it  difficult to increase his salary without changing jobs or relocating to a  different city—something that is less attractive now that his children are in  school.

The cost of living for some Canadian families has continued  to rise. This is true for things needed today—like healthy food and child care—as  well as for post-secondary tuition, something that Canadians rely on for upward  mobility.

Neera worked hard in school and earned scholarships to help  with the cost of her university tuition, but not every student can count on them.  Her sister had to take on nearly $30,000 in debt to finish her education, and  is still making payments 10 years after graduating from college.

Even though Canadian families have worked hard and are  working longer, with flat real wage income, families that face rapidly rising  costs are seeing their family budget strained.

Some Canadian families are also  taking on more debt to make ends meet. For David and Neera, this debt is a  constant source of worry. They took out a line of credit to repair their roof  last year, but that necessary repair added to their monthly bills, leaving  little room in their budget to save for things like back-to-school clothes and  family vacations.

The more that families owe, the harder it is for them to save  and plan for their future. As a result, more and more middle class Canadians  like David and Neera feel that they are working harder than ever, and not  getting any further ahead.

As the ability to pay for their kids' education, for their  aging parents' care and for their own retirement diminishes, Canadians are  questioning whether the promise of Canadian progress has passed.

The Rise of Inequality

This isn't true for all Canadians, however.

Among the wealthiest 0.01 per cent of Canadians, after-tax  after-transfer incomes have risen dramatically in the past 30 years. Individuals  earning more than $1.8 million per year have, on average, seen their incomes  rise by nearly 156 per cent in that time (or 3.1 per cent per year on average)  after taking inflation into account.

The net result is that even though there has been economic  growth over the past three decades, it hasn't much benefitted the middle class.  Too often, the benefits have been felt only by already wealthy Canadians, while  the middle class and those working hard to join it have struggled to make ends  meet.

David is  grateful to have a full-time job with good benefits, but a lot of the time he  feels like he's treading water. Friends who earn more are already talking about  when they will retire. David isn't sure if he will be able to retire any  time soon.

It's time to invest in growth that will benefit all.

Realizing Change

The need for more inclusive growth is not new. It has long  been understood that a strong economy starts with a strong middle class. When  middle class Canadians have more money to save, invest and grow the economy,  everyone benefits.

When middle class Canadians have confidence in their  disposable income, consumer demand is strong and businesses have the confidence  to invest.

When middle class Canadians have the ability to save and  invest, they have greater confidence in their ability to adapt to unforeseen  downturns.

When middle class families are secure in their jobs, they  have the ability to invest in the education of their children and save for  their retirement.

For example, Neera loves taking her daughters to the  Saturday morning market in their neighbourhood. The new middle class tax cut  means that she has a few more dollars on her paycheque every two weeks that she  and her girls can spend together, supporting local businesses.

With Budget 2016, the Government seeks to restore the  confidence that has been missing for too many Canadians, for too long. By  listening to Canadians, by putting their interests at the heart of this and  future budgets, a better future for all Canadians is possible.

Restoring Hope,  Rewarding Hard Work

For decades, Canada succeeded in part because Canadians felt  optimistic about the country's future.

That's true for David and Neera's parents. They believed  that their hard work would be rewarded with a good standard of living, a secure  retirement and better prospects for their children. It's why David's parents  worked so hard, why Neera's parents immigrated to Canada and why both families  made education such a priority.

It is of vital national interest that this sense of hope and  optimism be restored.

The new Government is taking a fundamentally different  approach, guided by the things that matter most to Canadians.

Budget 2016 focuses on growth, not austerity. It includes  measures that will grow the economy for the benefit of every Canadian.

In an environment of sustained economic weakness and low  interest rates, fiscal policy is the right policy lever to use to support  long-term growth. Indeed, international organizations, including the International  Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and  Development (OECD), have called on countries to make use of available fiscal  room.

Investment is needed and the time to invest is now. Smart  investments can strengthen and expand the middle class, reduce inequality among  Canadians and position Canada for sustained economic growth in the years to  come.

Positioning  Canada in a Shifting World Economy

In the Canadian economy—and indeed, in economies the world  over—dramatic shifts are taking place. Each one has the potential to disrupt  economic growth; taken together, they represent both challenges to, and opportunities  for, Canada's economy.

One such challenge is a demographic shift. For the first  time in Canada's history, there are more seniors over the age of 65 than there  are children under the age of 15. Over time, this means that there will be  fewer Canadians working to support the overall population. This fact, combined  with disappointing productivity gains, will make achieving strong, inclusive  growth even more difficult.

Managing this demographic shift requires that Canada do more  to invest in its next generation, in post-secondary education, and in training  and innovation. The standard of living of all Canadians—not just senior  Canadians—relies on it.

Global shifts in trade and the uncertain prospects for  emerging economies present another challenge. For example, over the past 15  years, Asia's share of the global economy has risen dramatically, a trend that  is expected to continue in the short term.

For Canada, this shift underscores the importance of  strengthening economic ties with Asia—but also suggests that any economic  shocks in the region will have a bigger effect on the Canadian economy than in  the past.

Shifts in technology—toward cleaner economies and more  digitally connected ones—also cannot be ignored. Canada can either take  advantage of these opportunities or be left behind. For example, over the past  decade, global new investment in clean energy has increased fivefold from about  US$60 billion in 2004 to almost US$330 billion in 2015.

The Government  has a responsibility to make investments that will position Canada for future  growth. That means greater investments in the infrastructure that allows Canada  to move people and goods, as well as in the skills and technology that make  Canada competitive.

It also means that to keep building its workforce, Canada  needs to be a welcoming country. This year, Canada intends to welcome more than  300,000 new permanent residents.

And it means taking steps to ensure that Indigenous peoples,  Canada's fastest-growing population, are able to prosper and succeed.

A Long-Term Plan  for Growth

Budget 2016 recognizes that there are no quick solutions to  the challenges facing Canada's economy.

The good news is that Canada is starting from a relatively  strong fiscal position in 2016, with the lowest total government net  debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio of all G7 countries.

This low debt ratio gives the Government room to make  strategic investments now that will grow the economy well into the future.  Investing in things like better roads and public transit will help David and  Neera to get home sooner at the end of a long day—but it will also help to move  the people and the products that help grow our economy.

And whether it's expanded public transit or infrastructure  that will help mitigate the effects of climate change or build stronger  communities that feel like home, David and Neera's daughters will also benefit  from these investments, especially if they are made now, when interest rates  are at historic lows.

When it comes to competing globally, Canada is also well  positioned—Canadian workers like David and Neera are highly educated, and  Canada's corporate tax rate is one of the lowest among G7 countries.

Challenges  like the ones Canada is facing cannot be solved with short-term solutions, and  opportunities can't be realized without smart, sustained investments. By  investing in the things Canada's economy needs to prosper over the long term, Budget  2016 sets the stage for stronger economic growth that will benefit more Canadians  in the years to come.

Toward More Inclusive  Growth

Whatever their own economic circumstances, Canadians  overwhelmingly believe in fairness, and in the idea that benefits that come  from a strong and growing economy should be accessible to all who work hard  for them.

The Government agrees. It is committed to strengthening the  middle class, by giving more help to those who need it, and less to those who  don't.

Budget 2016 sets a course for fairer, more inclusive growth.  It reflects the priorities of Canadians like David and Neera, who expect the Government  to be on their side. The Government's priorities are Canadians' priorities.

These priorities include:

Help for the  middle class —A strong economy starts with a strong middle class. Budget  2016 introduces the new, fairer, tax-free Canada Child Benefit, eliminates poorly  targeted tax breaks and boosts investments in student financial assistance.  These measures, combined with the new tax cut for the middle class and a new  tax bracket for individuals with more than $200,000 in taxable income per year,  will give Canada's middle class the help it needs to grow and prosper.

Growth for the  middle class —To strengthen the middle class and deliver more inclusive  growth for more Canadians, Budget 2016 makes historic investments in  infrastructure and innovation. These investments will both provide immediate  help to Canada's middle class and help expand opportunities for those working  hard to join it.

A better future  for Indigenous peoples —It is time for a renewed relationship between Canada  and Indigenous peoples, one based on trust, respect and a true spirit of  cooperation. The investments in education, infrastructure, training and other  programs contained in Budget 2016 will help to secure a better quality of life  for Indigenous peoples—and build a stronger, more unified and more prosperous  Canada.

A clean growth  economy —A clean environment and a strong economy go hand in hand. Budget  2016 recognizes this, making strategic investments in clean technology and taking  concrete steps to address the causes and effects of climate change.

An inclusive and  fair Canada —Canada is at its best and most prosperous when all Canadians  have a real and fair chance at success. The investments in Budget 2016  help to extend opportunities to more Canadians, and will help to build a  healthier, more creative, more generous and more just Canada.

Conclusion

Budget 2016 is about Canadians. About the willingness of  people like David and Neera to work hard, and about their hopes for a brighter,  more prosperous future for themselves, their children and their future  grandchildren.

Canadians understand that a country can't cut its way to  prosperity. The Government understands that hard work alone is not enough. A  new approach—one that includes smart investments and fair choices—is needed.

Budget 2016 reflects this  new approach.



<<< source: overview-apercu-en.html >>>

Economic and Fiscal Overview - The Path Forward

Introduction

There is a growing consensus, in Canada and    around the world, that fiscal policy has an important role to play in    delivering stronger economic growth today, and in expanding the economy’s    growth potential over the long term. The Government will deliver on its    promise to help strengthen and grow Canada’s middle class to recognize    this potential.

In December 2015, the  Government began the important work of strengthening the middle class, by  introducing significant tax cuts. Budget 2016 makes further targeted  investments to grow the economy and create opportunities for the  middle class.

…A comprehensive approach is needed to reduce    over-reliance on monetary policy. In particular, near-term fiscal policy    should be more supportive where appropriate and provided there is fiscal    space, especially through investment that boosts both the demand and the    supply potential of the economy.

In challenging economic times, Canadians and the Canadian  economy need help. The Government is committed to providing that help in a  fiscally responsible way. In particular, the Government is committed to  reducing the federal debt-to-GDP (gross domestic product) ratio to a lower  level over a five-year period, ending in 2020–21. Where new spending is  introduced, it will be focused on boosting Canada’s long-term growth potential  while preserving our low-debt advantage.

This section outlines the major global and economic  developments over the past year and lays out the Government’s fiscal plan,  including measures in this budget.

Notes: This section incorporates data available  up to and including March 17, 2016, unless otherwise indicated. All rates are  reported at annual rates unless otherwise noted.

Global  Economic Developments and Outlook

The global economic situation remains challenging. Global  growth continues to slow, financial market volatility has risen, equity values  have declined and commodity prices have fallen significantly.

Global Growth  has Slowed

Global economic growth slowed in 2015 to its weakest pace  since the 2008–2009 recession, led by slower growth in emerging economies.

In China, real GDP growth in 2015 eased to  6.9 per cent, its slowest rate of growth in 25 years, reflecting  weaker growth in the country’s industrial sector (manufacturing and  construction). This slowdown reflects the transition of the Chinese economy  toward slower but more sustainable growth based on household consumption and  the service sector, rather than on investment and manufacturing.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects that growth in  China will continue to decelerate modestly over the near term, but there are  risks that growth could slow more sharply than expected (Chart 11). Years  of strong investment and a large increase in corporate sector debt pose the  largest risks.

Growth in other emerging economies also slowed in 2015,  particularly commodity-producing countries. However, growth in these other  emerging economies is expected to pick up modestly over the near term as the  outlook for commodity-producing countries stabilizes.

Growth in most advanced economies remains modest. In the  euro area, real GDP growth improved to 1.5 per cent in 2015 from 0.9 per cent  in 2014, as lower crude oil prices helped to boost consumer spending growth to  its fastest pace since 2007. Progress towards a more robust recovery remains  tentative, however, as high levels of non-performing loans have restricted  lending to businesses, hampering the investment needed to sustain stronger  growth.

The IMF expects euro area growth to remain slow over 2016  and 2017. Significant risks to growth persist, including high levels of  sovereign debt, still-weak bank balance sheets, geopolitical uncertainty with  regard to Russia, and the ongoing refugee and migrant crisis.

In contrast, the United  States has been a relatively bright spot in the global  economy (Chart 12). Real GDP growth in  the U.S. held steady at 2.4 per cent in 2015—above its recovery average of 2.1  per cent—thanks to strong consumer spending. The U.S. labour market also  continues to show strength—net new job growth has averaged 235,000 per month  over the past six months and the unemployment rate has fallen to 4.9 per cent.  The improvement in the U.S. economic situation has been accompanied by moves  from the Federal Reserve to normalize monetary policy, first by ending asset  purchases and, more recently, by raising its policy interest rate for the first  time since the 2008–2009 recession. Fiscal policy was broadly neutral in 2014  and 2015 following significant tightening earlier in the recovery, but is now  expected to be modestly supportive of growth in 2016, primarily  reflecting increased spending, including a new five-year program on  transportation infrastructure.

That said, the U.S. is not  immune to the effects of a challenging global economic environment. The roughly  20 per cent appreciation of the U.S. dollar since mid-2014, combined with  restrained global demand, has hurt U.S. net exports. The manufacturing sector  has been particularly hard hit (Chart 13). During 2015, the decline in net  exports subtracted 0.6 percentage points from U.S. real GDP growth.

In addition, amid the decline  in global oil prices, oil and gas investment is down by half, weighing on  broader economic activity and employment in the energy-producing regions of  Texas, North Dakota and Alaska.

At the same time, lower  gasoline prices appear to have boosted household saving and balance sheets  rather than spending. As a result, the overall impact of lower oil prices on  U.S. growth has so far been broadly neutral.

According to the survey of private sector economists  conducted by the Department of Finance in February 2016, real GDP growth in the  U.S. is projected to remain steady over the next few years. Growth is expected  to be in the range of 2-2.5 per cent through 2020, due to a solid labour  market, sound corporate and household balance sheets, and a continued gradual  recovery in the housing market.

That said, the average private sector forecast has  been marked down from previous surveys. This primarily reflects the negative  impact of the stronger U.S. dollar on exports and the related external forces  of weaker-than-expected global economic activity.

In this  context, owing to a fragile global environment, the risks to the American  economy are tilted to the downside. In particular, the U.S. could be negatively  affected by further financial turbulence emanating from China and other  emerging economies. While the effects of global headwinds have so far been  confined to manufacturing and resource industries, this weakness could spread  to the broader economy. Indeed, survey data on non-manufacturing activity has  shown a softening in recent months, indicating that momentum may have already  slowed.

Overall, the IMF has revised down its outlook for the global  economy and expects growth will continue to be modest in 2016 and 2017, well  below the pace at the beginning of the decade. Important risks remain to global  growth, including the possibility of a hard landing in China and continued weaker-than-expected  growth in the U.S. and other advanced economies.

Financial  Market Volatility Has Risen

As global growth has continued to slow, financial market  volatility has risen. Concerns over China’s slowing growth, and uncertainty  about how Chinese authorities will respond, have led to turbulence in Chinese  equity markets, which has spilled over to equity markets in advanced  economies (Chart 14).

Financial market volatility also seems to reflect concerns  about how rapidly the Federal Reserve will raise its policy interest rate, and worries  about the negative impacts lower commodity prices may have on emerging  economies. These factors have led to a tightening of external financing  conditions for many emerging economies—capital inflows have declined, sovereign  spreads have widened and currencies have depreciated further.

This has increased the risks to growth in emerging economies,  particularly those with high levels of corporate debt (often denominated in  U.S. dollars) or large current account deficits. Financial conditions have also  tightened in some advanced economies, notably the United States.

Commodity  Prices Have Fallen Sharply

Persistent oversupply and rising inventories, along  with generalized financial market turmoil and weak demand, have continued to  weigh on commodity prices. This is particularly true for crude oil prices. West  Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil prices declined to close to their lowest level in  over a decade in early 2016 before firming somewhat in March.

Most analysts expect oil prices to remain low and  volatile, but given rising global demand and easing supply, expect market  conditions to balance and prices to begin to recover later this year or in  early 2017. Current futures prices suggest that oil prices could remain low for  an extended period (Chart 15).

Canada’s  Economic Situation

The fragile and uncertain global economic environment has weighed  on Canada’s own economy. Over the last four years, growth in Canada has slowed to  below 2 per cent on average and the sharp decline in global crude oil prices since  the end of 2014 has placed more significant downward pressure on the economy.  However, the conditions are in place for the economy to begin to regain momentum,  and post more solid GDP growth and job creation going forward.

The Effect of  Low Oil Prices on National Income, Investment and Employment

These challenging external economic conditions—in particular  the large and rapid decline in global crude oil prices—had a significant impact  on the Canadian economy in 2015, and will continue to cast a shadow over the  country’s prospects in 2016.

The magnitude of the shock facing the Canadian economy is  substantial. Commodity prices began to decline in mid-2014. Oil prices have now  dropped by about 65 per cent and are expected to recover only slowly in  the coming years.

Compared to what was expected at the time of the Department  of Finance June 2014 survey of private sector economists, conducted before the  collapse in commodity prices, the level of nominal GDP for planning purposes is  more than $150 billion lower, equivalent to about 7 per cent of GDP, by the end  of 2017 (Chart 16).

Because low crude oil prices led to significant declines in  investments in the oil and gas sector, real GDP growth was negative or weak  over much of 2015 (Chart 17). Estimates from Statistics Canada and the Canadian  Association of Petroleum Producers suggest that oil and gas investment dropped  by between 30 and 40 per cent in 2015—a negative shock to the economy of $30  billion or more, equivalent to 1½ per cent of nominal GDP.

The  declines in business investment in the oil and gas sector have been felt most  dramatically in related sectors and in the major oil-producing provinces of  Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland and Labrador, where the impacts of the  sharp decline in oil prices continue to unfold.

In  Alberta, paid employment 1 has fallen by about 65,000 since October 2014 (when oil prices began to fall  notably), with over 95 per cent of these positions lost in industries directly  related to the oil sector. Many indicators of broader economic activity, such  as retail trade and housing sales, have also weakened, and there is a risk that  both will fall further in the coming quarters as employment in the province  continues to decline. The spillover effects of weakness in Alberta’s economy—traditionally  a strong contributor to Canada’s economic growth—are already having direct  negative impacts on the broader Canadian economy.

Lower investment in the oil and gas sector is reducing  demand for goods and services across Canada. Simulations conducted using  Statistics Canada’s Input-Output model suggest that a 50 per cent decline in  oil and gas sector investment (in line with current industry expectations for  the cumulative decline over 2015 and 2016) could reduce output outside of major  oil-producing provinces by almost ¾ of a per cent (Chart 18).

This finding is supported by the Bank of Canada’s Winter  2015–16 Business Outlook Survey, released in mid-January. The Survey noted that  over the course of 2015, an increasing number of firms located outside  energy-producing regions and active in non-energy sectors have begun to report  negative impacts from the oil price shock.

Positive  Developments Outside the Energy Sector

Though current circumstances are challenging, the  Canadian economy shows signs of resilience. Energy-related output contracted  sharply over the first half of 2015, but output outside the energy sector  remained largely stable. Moreover, over the second half of the year, despite  significant ongoing weakness in the energy sector, non-energy sector output  regained momentum, rising at an annual average rate of 2.2 per cent. This spurred  average growth in total industry GDP of 2.0 per cent over the second half of  the year (Chart 19).

In addition, despite job losses in oil-producing  regions, total employment in Canada has risen by almost 125,000 since October  2014, reflecting gains outside the resource sector (Chart 20). This growth  was not strong enough to offset labour force population growth, however. As a  result, the national unemployment rate increased to 7.3 per cent in  February 2016, up 0.7 percentage points from its level in October 2014.

The Conditions  for More Robust Growth Going Forward

Looking ahead, the Canadian economy is well-positioned to  begin recovering from the global oil price shock, gain traction, and post more  solid GDP growth and job creation.

As the economy gradually adjusts to weaker commodity prices,  a lower Canadian dollar and ongoing growth in the U.S. economy are  offering some support. Canadian exports have shown signs of improvement,  particularly forestry products, motor vehicles and consumer goods, in line with  increased demand for vehicles and strengthening housing market activity in the  U.S. (Chart 21). Stronger exports at the end of 2015 and in early 2016 are  also translating into solid gains in real manufacturing sales.

The potential for stronger exports, along with the  expectation of steady U.S. growth, will also boost incentives for Canadian  firms to invest in additional productive capacity. Over the last six years,  manufacturers have operated near capacity, but investment has performed quite  poorly. As of 2014, manufacturing sector investment had fallen by 16 per cent  from its pre-recession level. To meet increased demand, Canadian producers will  have to increase investment, boosting near-term economic growth and longer-term  productive capacity (Chart 22).

Boosting investment will be somewhat more challenging due to  the lower Canadian dollar, given that imports account for a significant portion  of machinery and equipment purchases. However, this is likely to be outweighed  by the positive impacts of stronger external demand on profits and therefore  incentives to invest.

Beyond restoring Canada’s exports of existing goods to  our traditional markets, if Canadian exporters are to succeed over the long  term it will be essential that they exploit rapidly growing emerging markets and  shifts in technology toward cleaner and more connected economies. In  particular, by the end of this decade Asia is expected to represent almost half  of the world’s economy. While Canadian exporters have made some inroads into  these markets, there is potential for a stronger contribution to growth from  exports to these markets going forward (Chart 23).

Outstanding Risks  to
    the Economic Outlook

In light of recent developments in the global and  Canadian economies, private sector economists have revised down their near-term  outlook for real GDP growth and GDP inflation (Chart 24). Private sector  economists now expect real GDP growth of 1.4 per cent in 2016 and 2.2 per cent  in 2017.

These economists are also forecasting an average price  of US$40 per barrel for WTI crude oil in 2016. These lower expected crude oil  prices have led to revised expectations for GDP inflation (the broadest measure  of economy-wide price inflation). Economists expect GDP inflation of 1.0 per  cent in 2016.

Nominal GDP growth in the February survey is expected  to be 2.4 per cent in 2016. Further details on the average private sector  forecast can be found in Annex 1, Table A1.1.

The Canadian economy continues to face the risks outlined in  the Department of Finance’s February 22 outlook.

In particular:

Growth in the U.S. economy could fail to meet  expectations. This could have negative implications for Canada’s exports and  could also limit the incentives for increased investment in non-energy sectors  of Canada’s economy.

Crude oil prices could fail to rebound as  quickly as expected. Indeed, futures markets suggest crude oil prices in 2020 could  remain about US$14 per barrel below expectations in the February private  sector survey.

Further sharp exchange rate movements and large  capital outflows could lead to financial strains in vulnerable emerging  economies. This could spill over to global financial markets, with impacts on  Canada.

Rebalancing in China could result in a  sharper-than-expected slowdown in growth, prompting further volatility in  financial markets and greater declines in global commodity prices.

Beyond these risks to the global economy, there are also  downside risks specific to Canada.

There is a risk that the positive effects of a  lower dollar on Canada’s manufacturers and exporters could take longer than  expected to materialize and be less beneficial than anticipated—and that the  adjustment process may prove costlier and more challenging than expected. Canada’s manufacturing  industry underwent significant structural changes over the last decade, as a  result of a much stronger dollar. In order to take advantage of the new lower exchange  rate environment, manufacturers will once again need to undergo a period of  adjustment. Further, many of our  competitor countries in the U.S. market (such as Mexico) have also seen  declines in the value of their currencies relative to the U.S. dollar, which  could reduce the boost to Canada’s international competitiveness resulting from  the lower dollar.

Canada’s household debt-to-disposable income  ratio remains high, which could limit the contribution to growth of both  housing and consumer spending to a greater extent than is anticipated in coming  years.

Given  these risks, for fiscal planning purposes, the Government has judged it  appropriate to adjust downwards the private sector forecast for nominal GDP by  $40 billion per year for 2016 through 2020.

The size of the $40 billion forecast adjustment takes  into account the following factors:

Firstly, this adjustment is consistent with oil  prices averaging about $25 per barrel in 2016, rather than the $40 assumed  in the February survey, and real GDP growth of 1.0 per cent in 2016, rather  than the 1.4 per cent in the February survey. Real GDP growth of 1 per  cent is within the range of private sector outlooks in the February survey,  while oil prices declined to close to $25 per barrel in both January and  February.

Secondly, this downward adjustment is broadly  equivalent to the average downward revisions to the private sector forecast for  nominal GDP in Budget 2015, the November 2015 Fall Update and the February  2016 survey (Chart 25).

This  forecast adjustment translates into a fiscal impact of approximately  $6 billion per year in 2016–17 and over each of the next four years. The  Government will continue to evaluate economic developments and risks to  determine the appropriateness of this forecast adjustment in the future.

Canada’s  Fiscal Strength

Taking Action  to Grow the Economy

The G20 must plan now for coordinated demand support using available fiscal space to boost public investment.

Governments in many countries are currently able to borrow for long periods at very low interest rates, which in effect increases fiscal space. Many countries have room for fiscal expansion to strengthen demand. This should focus on policies with strong short-run benefits and that also contribute to long-term growth.

In an environment of sustained  economic weakness and historically low interest rates, fiscal policy is the  right policy lever to use to support long-term growth. Indeed, international  organizations, including the IMF and the OECD, have called on countries to make  use of available fiscal room.

The Government believes strongly  that the best way to deliver more prosperity to more Canadians is by investing  in the economy today. From Canada’s position of fiscal strength, with a low  debt burden (Chart 26), with public debt charges as a percentage of budgetary  revenues at near-historic lows (Chart 27), and with interest rates at historic  lows, now is the time to make those investments.

With this budget, the Government is seizing the opportunity  to make targeted investments totaling $50.2 billion over six years (Table  1, “Budget 2016 measures”). Using the February outlook1 for planning  purposes, and accounting for budget measures, the budgetary balance is expected  to show a deficit of $29.4 billion in 2016–17, gradually declining to a  deficit of $14.3 billion in 2020–21. Further details are provided in Annex 1.

Economic  Impacts of Measures

The Department of Finance estimates that the measures  contained in Budget 2016, along with the middle class tax cut announced in  December 2015, will raise the level of real GDP by 0.5 per cent in the first  year and by 1.0 per cent by the second year, compared to what would  have been the case without these measures. This is expected to translate into 100,000  jobs created or maintained by 2017–18 (Table 2).

The planning assumptions for nominal GDP and the fiscal  balance presented in this budget do not explicitly account for this positive  impact. However, most private sector forecasters anticipated that additional  government measures to promote growth would be announced in this budget, and  thus included the economic impact of assumed measures in their individual  forecasts. As a result, the February private sector survey to some extent  incorporates the economic impacts of the measures announced in this budget.

This analysis was performed using the Department’s detailed  macroeconomic model that estimates the contributions of government spending or  tax policy to economic activity. Further details on this analysis, and the  associated multipliers, can be found in Annex 2.

A Responsible  Approach to Fiscal Management

Canada’s fiscal strength rests largely in its low debt  burden, and protecting this source of strength is of paramount importance. Low  debt ensures that future generations are not hampered by excessive interest  payments. It also maintains market confidence in the soundness of Canada’s  public finances and preserves Canada’s capacity to respond decisively to  potential future economic crises.

To maintain Canada’s low debt burden and its fiscal  advantage compared to its G7 peers, the Government is committed to reducing the  federal debt-to-GDP ratio to a lower level over a five-year period, ending in  2020–21.

In doing so, the Government is ensuring that the hard-fought  gains attained in the 1990s and 2000s—which saw the federal debt-to-GDP ratio  fall by more than half from its peak of 66.8 per cent in 1995–96—are preserved (Chart 28).

A Responsible  Return to Balanced Budgets

The Government remains committed to returning to balanced  budgets, and will do so in a responsible, realistic and transparent way.

While this budget presents a baseline fiscal forecast for  planning purposes, transparent fiscal planning also means recognizing that a  variety of economic scenarios will have different fiscal outcomes. It is the  responsibility of the Government to clearly communicate to Canadians these  forecasts and future intentions.

It is important, for example, to consider the impact that  alternative economic growth scenarios can have on fiscal projections, and to  recognize that the accuracy of economic and fiscal projections is prone to more  error when those projections extend further into the future.  Economic  forecast errors on the level of nominal GDP can have sizeable impacts on the  budgetary balance (Chart 29).

Further, small changes in  economic growth assumptions can also have large impacts on the level of nominal  GDP and thus on the budgetary balance over an extended projection horizon. For  example, if the Government based current fiscal projections on the average of  the upper four individual forecasts (or top four) for nominal GDP growth—which is equivalent to nominal GDP growth  being 0.4 percentage points per year higher, on average, than in the full  February survey—the budget would  effectively be balanced by 2020–21, and the federal debt-to-GDP ratio would be  well below its 2015–16 level (Charts 30 and 31).

For comparison, the Budget 2016  fiscal track is based on the private sector forecast for nominal GDP adjusted downward  by $40 billion per year for 2016 through 2020, which is equivalent to nominal  GDP growth being 0.3 percentage points per year lower, on average, than in the  February 2016 survey.

Going forward, the  Government will continue to work with private sector economists to develop a  baseline economic outlook for fiscal planning purposes. The Government will  also develop alternative growth scenarios around the average private sector  outlook, and these alternative economic scenarios—including their fiscal  implications—will be communicated to Canadians as projections are updated. The  Government will set a timeline for balancing the budget when growth is forecast  to remain on a sustainably higher track.

Repealing the  Federal Balanced Budget Act

The balanced budget legislation enacted under the previous  Government is inconsistent with the Government’s plan to return to balanced budgets  responsibly, and in a manner that supports economic growth. An immediate return  to balance in 2016–17 would require fiscal consolidation in the order of 1 per  cent of nominal GDP. As a result, the Government will propose legislative  repeal of the Federal Balanced Budget Act .

1 Paid employment as  measured in Statistics Canada’s Survey of Employment, Payroll and  Hours (SEPH).



<<< source: ch1-en.html >>>

Chapter 1 - Help for the Middle Class

Introduction

A strong economy starts with a    strong middle class.

Canadians understand this, and    the Government does, too. That’s why building an economy that works for    middle class Canadians and their families is this Government’s top priority.

Today, too many middle class    families struggle with the costs of raising their children, and too many    children continue to live in poverty.

To build the brighter future    that all Canadians deserve, investments are needed: investments that will    strengthen and grow the middle class, that will help young Canadians to    succeed, and that will support those who need help entering or re-entering    the workforce.

Budget 2016 invests in    Canadians, sets the stage for greater economic equality, and positions Canada    for sustained economic growth in the years to come.

This  chapter outlines the Government’s plan to help Canada’s middle class and those  working hard to join it.

Strengthening the Middle Class

On December 7, 2015, as one of its  first actions, the Government delivered on its commitment to strengthen the  middle class.

It did so by introducing a tax cut for  Canada’s middle class, reducing the second personal income tax rate to 20.5 per  cent from 22 per cent—a 7 per cent reduction. Beginning January 1, 2016,  Canadians with taxable income between $45,282 and $90,563 saw their income tax  rate fall, leaving more money on their paycheques to save, invest and grow the  economy.

In total, nearly 9 million Canadians are  now benefitting from this tax cut. Single Canadians who benefit from this  measure will see an average tax reduction of $330 every year, and couples who  benefit will see an average tax reduction of $540 every year.

To help  pay for this middle class tax cut, the Government raised taxes on the  wealthiest Canadians by introducing a new top income tax rate of 33 per cent  for individuals with more than $200,000 in taxable income each year.

Taken  together, these changes give middle class Canadians a tax break by making taxes  fairer, as shown in Chart 1.1.

With more money in their pockets,  middle class families will be able to save more, enhancing their own financial  security. They will also have a greater opportunity to invest—in their own  future and that of their children. Finally, they will have more money to spend,  which will boost economic activity in the short term, and also put Canada on a  firmer growth path over the long term.

It is  widely recognized that increasing support for low-income families also has a  positive and long-term effect. Poverty is not just a problem for individual  Canadians—all of Canada is affected. It makes it more difficult to get and stay  healthy, and more difficult to find and keep good work.

Poverty  is particularly challenging in the case of children, and its effect can be long  term. When children are lifted out of poverty, they are better able to develop  to their fullest potential, an opportunity that every Canadian deserves.

Canada’s  existing child benefit system is complicated, consisting of a tax-free,  income-tested Canada Child Tax Benefit with two components (the base  benefit and the National Child Benefit supplement) and a taxable Universal  Child Care Benefit received by all families, regardless of income.

It is a  system that is both inadequate (it does not provide families with the support  they need) and not sufficiently targeted to those who need it most (families  with very high incomes receive benefits). Canadian families deserve better, and  with this budget, will get the help they need to succeed.

Introducing  the Canada Child Benefit

Budget  2016 gives Canadian families more money to help with the high cost of raising  their children, by replacing the current complicated child benefit system with  the new Canada Child Benefit. The introduction of the Canada Child Benefit  represents the most significant social policy innovation in a generation.

The Canada Child Benefit will be:

simpler —families will receive a single payment  every month;

tax-free —families will not have to pay  back part of the amount received when they file their tax returns;

better-targeted to those who need it most—low- and middle-income  families will receive more benefits, and those with the highest incomes  (generally over $150,000) will receive lower benefits than under the current  system; and

much more generous —families benefitting  will see an average increase in child benefits of almost $2,300 in the 2016–17  benefit year.

The Canada Child Benefit will provide a  maximum annual benefit of up to $6,400 per child under the age of 6  and up to $5,400 per child for those aged 6 through 17. Families with less than  $30,000 in net income will receive the maximum benefit.

Under the current system, families with  $30,000 in net income and one child would have received $4,852 in child  benefits, after tax, if their child is under the age of 6 and $3,916 if their  child is aged 6 through 17.

To recognize the additional costs of caring  for a child with a severe disability, Budget 2016 proposes to continue to  provide the Child Disability Benefit, an additional amount of up to $2,730 per  child eligible for the Disability Tax Credit.

More details on phase-out thresholds and  rates for the Canada Child Benefit and the Child Disability Benefit can be  found in the accompanying document Tax  Measures: Supplementary Information .

The Canada Child Benefit will be paid  monthly to eligible families, beginning in July 2016, replacing the Canada  Child Tax Benefit and the Universal Child Care Benefit.

It is estimated that families will receive  approximately $23 billion in Canada Child Benefit payments during the 2016–17  benefit year. Nine out of ten families will receive more in child benefits than  under the current system (see Charts 1.2 and 1.3 for illustrations).

Another key feature of the Canada Child  Benefit is that it will deliver enhanced support to low-income families,  including many single parents. As Charts 1.2 and 1.3 illustrate, the maximum  benefit will be much more generous than that provided by the current system.  Moreover, the benefit will start to be reduced at a higher income level, and  will be reduced more gradually as income rises.

With the introduction of a much  better-targeted Canada Child Benefit, about 300,000 fewer children will be  living in poverty in 2016–17 compared with 2014–15. This represents a major  step forward towards the goal of ensuring that all children have a fair shot at  succeeding. The Canada Child Benefit will continue to play a leading role in  supporting poverty reduction in future years.

How  Canadian Families Will Benefit From the New Canada Child Benefit

Increased Benefits for a Family of Four With  $90,000—Example

Aveen and Sarita have two children aged 8 and 5.  Aveen earned $30,000 and Sarita earned $60,000 in 2015. Together, they would have  received $3,145 under the current system (for the July 2016 to June 2017  benefit year). In comparison, the Canada Child Benefit program will deliver  $5,650 in tax-free payments—a net after-tax increase of $2,505.

Increased Benefits for a Single Parent With One  Child and $30,000—Example

Samantha is a single parent with one child aged  3. She earned $30,000 in 2015. Samantha would have received $4,852 under  the current system (for the July 2016 to June 2017 benefit year). Instead,  she will receive $6,400 in tax-free Canada Child Benefit payments—a net  after-tax increase of $1,548.

Increased Benefits for a Family of Four With  $120,000—Example

Ann and Derek have two children aged 7 and 4.  Derek earned $84,000 and Ann earned $36,000 in 2015. Together, they would have received  $1,901 under the current system (for the July 2016 to June 2017 benefit year).  They will receive $3,940 in tax-free Canada Child Benefit payments—a net  after-tax increase of $2,039.

Increased Benefits for a Family With One Child  Eligible for the Child Disability Benefit—Example

Marion and Jacques have one child aged 4 who is  eligible for the Child Disability Benefit. Marion earned $40,000 and Jacques  earned $20,000 in 2015. Marion and Jacques would have received $5,129 under the  current system (for the July 2016 to June 2017 benefit year). Instead, they  will receive $7,030 in tax-free Canada Child Benefit payments—a net after-tax increase  of $1,901.

These  additional child benefits include:

An increase of $1,607 from the  introduction of the Canada Child Benefit; and

An  increase of $294 from the change to the Child Disability Benefit.

The Canada Child Benefit will be  complemented by other investments for families with children proposed in Budget  2016, such as funding towards establishing a National Framework on Early  Learning and Child Care (see Chapter 2—Growth for the Middle Class).

Eliminating  Income Splitting for Couples With Children

To better deliver help to those families  who need it most, Budget 2016 proposes to eliminate income splitting for  couples with children under the age of 18 for the 2016 and subsequent taxation  years. Pension income splitting will not  be affected by this change .

Eliminating  the Children’s Fitness Tax Credit and the Children’s Arts Tax Credit

The Children’s Fitness and Arts Tax Credits  are currently worth up to $150 and $75 per child on up to $1,000 and $500 in  eligible expenses, respectively. As part of the Government’s efforts to simplify  the tax code and better target support for families with children, Budget 2016  proposes to reduce the  maximum eligible expenses for the Children’s Fitness and Arts Tax Credits by half for 2016, and to eliminate both credits as of 2017.

The Government’s measures for families with  children, combined with the middle class tax cut, will provide these families  with additional net after-tax benefits of approximately $14 billion during  the 2015–16 to 2020–21 period.

Helping  Young Canadians Succeed

For generations, Canadian parents have told  their children a similar story: if you want a good job, stay in school. At the  same time, employers are constantly seeking highly skilled workers. It’s what  our economy needs to grow and remain competitive.

Young Canadians took this message to heart.  They knew that studying hard in school would guarantee entry into an affordable  college, university or apprenticeship program, which would in turn lead to a  steady and secure job that made it possible to pay down what little debt they  had accumulated.

Unfortunately, for too many Canadians,  rising costs have made post-secondary education less affordable. Fewer are able  to save for their education, and those who receive financial assistance often  find it difficult to repay their loans.

As Canada’s population ages, its prosperity will increasingly depend  on young Canadians getting the education and training they need to prepare for  the jobs of today and tomorrow. Now more than ever, it is important that  post-secondary education remains affordable and accessible, and that young  Canadians have access to meaningful work at the beginning of their careers.

The future of young Canadians—and indeed, the future of all  Canadians—depends on it.

Making  Post-Secondary Education More Affordable

Budget 2016 proposes a package of reforms  to the Canada Student Loans Program that will make post-secondary education  more affordable for students from low- and middle-income families and ensure that  student debt loads are manageable. These measures will also simplify the  application process for student financial assistance, making the Canada Student  Loans Program more transparent and predictable.

Enhancing  Canada Student Grants

Budget 2016 proposes to increase Canada  Student Grant amounts by 50 per cent:

from $2,000 to $3,000 per year  for students from low-income families;

from $800 to $1,200 per year  for students from middle-income families; and

from $1,200 to $1,800 per year  for part-time students.

Increased grant amounts will be available for  the 2016–17 academic year.

Enhancing the Canada Student Grant amounts,  which have not been updated since 2009, will ensure that students receive help  that reflects the rising costs of post-secondary education, and that keeps debt  loads manageable.

Middle-income families that struggle to  save for their kids’ education will benefit from these increased amounts.  Nearly 100,000 students from middle-income families will receive increased  assistance each year as a result of this measure.

The results are even greater for low-income  families, many of whom find it impossible to save for post-secondary education.  Approximately 247,000 students from low-income families will benefit from these  changes.

Part-time students, who often attend school  while working or caring for families of their own, will benefit as well.  Approximately 16,000 part-time students will receive more financial assistance.

In total, these measures will provide  assistance of $1.53 billion over five years, starting in 2016–17, and $329  million per year thereafter.

Going forward, the Government will work  with the provinces and territories to expand eligibility for Canada Student  Grants so that even more students can receive non-repayable assistance. Under  the new model, the existing low- and middle-income thresholds will be replaced  with a single progressive threshold under which grant amounts will gradually  decline based on income and family size.

The new eligibility thresholds are expected  to be in place for the 2017–18 academic year, following consultations with  provinces and territories. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $790 million over  four years, starting in 2017–18, and $216 million per year thereafter to expand  eligibility thresholds.

The Canada  Student Grants Program has been a great success and has had a tremendous impact  on students in this country. To remain relevant it must be increased to keep up  with the rising costs associated with attaining an education…Targeted grants  are the best mechanism to reduce student debt loads, and are associated  with higher rates of successful debt repayment over time.

Making  Student Debt More Manageable

Too often, former students are confronted  with sizeable outstanding loans that they are unable to repay.

Budget 2016 proposes to increase the loan  repayment threshold under the Canada Student Loans Program’s Repayment  Assistance Plan to ensure that no student will have to repay their Canada  Student Loan until they are earning at least $25,000 per year.

This new threshold will provide increased  flexibility in repayment and better reflects minimum wages, helping to ease  students’ transition into the workforce.

This measure will provide assistance of  $131.4 million over five years, beginning in 2016–17, and $31 million  per year thereafter. The Government will also increase efforts to make sure  that students eligible for assistance under the Repayment Assistance Plan are  making full use of the program.

Making Student Debt More Manageable

Steven, a recent post-secondary graduate, earns  $23,000 per year at his current job. He is finding it difficult to repay his  outstanding Canada Student Loans debt of $12,000. Under the proposed changes to  the Repayment Assistance Plan, Steven will not be required to make any  immediate payments on his Canada Student Loan since his annual income is below  the new $25,000 income threshold for repayment. The Government will cover the  interest owing on Steven’s Canada Student Loan until he has the financial  flexibility to repay his loan.

Introducing  a Flat-Rate Student Contribution

Budget 2016 proposes to introduce a  flat-rate student contribution to determine eligibility for Canada Student  Loans and Grants to replace the current system of assessing student income and financial  assets.

This change would allow students to work and gain valuable labour  market experience without having to worry about a reduction in their level of  financial assistance. It would also benefit adult learners, many of whom may  work while studying or have significant financial assets. This measure will provide  assistance of $267.7 million over four years, starting in 2017–18, and $73  million per year thereafter.

The Government will work collaboratively  with provinces and territories to finalize the flat-rate contribution model in  time for implementation in the 2017–18 academic year.

Eliminating  the Education Tax Credit and the Textbook Tax Credit

In  support of the Government’s commitment to improve the affordability of  post-secondary education for low- and middle-income families, Budget 2016  proposes to eliminate the Education and Textbook Tax Credits, effective January  1, 2017. These credits are not targeted based on income and often provide  little direct support to students at the time they need it most.

Savings realized from eliminating these credits  will be used to enhance student financial assistance, to help provide timely  assistance to students from low- and middle-income families. Tax credit amounts  carried forward from years prior to 2017 will still be claimable in 2017 and  subsequent years.

Measures proposed in Budget 2015 related to  the Canada Student Loans Program and Canada Student Grants will not be pursued  in order to better target support to students from low- and middle-income families.

Helping  Youth Obtain Valuable Work Experience

A  Renewed Youth Employment Strategy

Each year the Government invests more than  $330 million in the Youth Employment Strategy to help young people gain the  skills, abilities and work experience they need to find and maintain good  employment.

To expand employment opportunities for  young Canadians, Budget 2016 proposes to invest an additional $165.4 million in  the Youth Employment Strategy in 2016–17.

Funding will be used to:

create new green jobs for youth,  to help young Canadians gain valuable work experience, learn about our natural  environment and contribute to economic growth in environmental sectors;

increase the number of youth  who access the Skills Link program, which helps young Canadians—including  Indigenous and disabled youth—make a more successful transition to the  workforce; and

increase job opportunities for  young Canadians in the heritage sector, under the Young Canada Works program.

This funding would be in addition to the  $339 million already announced for the Canada Summer Jobs program, to be  delivered over three years, starting in 2016–17.

Going forward, the Government will make  additional investments in the Youth Employment Strategy in 2017–18 and 2018–19.  These investments will be targeted toward supporting employment opportunities  for vulnerable youth.

The Government of Canada understands that to  successfully transition into the labour market, young Canadians need meaningful  work at the beginning of their careers. A summer job is an important way for  youth to gain work experience.

To that  end, on February 12, 2016, the Government announced that it will invest  $339 million over three years, starting in 2016–17, to create up to 35,000  additional jobs in each of the next three years under the Canada Summer Jobs  program. This investment will more than double the number of job opportunities  supported by the program.

The  Canada Summer Jobs program helps employers create summer job opportunities for  students. The program provides funding to not-for-profit organizations,  public-sector employers and small businesses with 50 or fewer employees to  create summer job opportunities for young people aged 15 to 30 years who are full-time  students intending to return to their studies in the next school year. The  program is part of the Government’s Youth Employment Strategy.

Prime  Minister’s Youth Council

To ensure the  Government does a better job of understanding and addressing the needs of  Canada’s youth, over the course of the next year, the Government will develop  and establish a Prime Minister’s Youth Advisory Council, consisting of young  Canadians aged 16-24 from diverse communities and from all regions of Canada.  The Council will provide non-partisan advice to the Prime Minister on key  issues such as employment and education, building stronger communities as well  as climate change and clean growth.

Youth  Service

The Government is committed to helping  young Canadians gain valuable work and life experience while providing support  for communities across Canada. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $105 million  over five years, starting in
       2016–17, and $25 million per year thereafter in support of youth service.  Further details will be announced in the coming months.

Expert  Panel on Youth Employment

More can—and should—be done to improve job  outcomes for vulnerable youth. To that end, Budget 2016 proposes to establish  an Expert Panel on Youth Employment to assess the barriers faced by vulnerable  youth in finding and keeping jobs, and to examine innovative practices used by  governments, non-governmental organizations and employers both at home and  abroad to improve job opportunities for vulnerable youth.

The Panel will report back to the Minister of Youth and the Minister  of Employment, Workforce Development and Labour by December 2016. The Panel’s  findings will help inform future investments in this area, including  enhancements to the Youth Employment Strategy.

Increasing  Co-op Placements and Strengthening Work Integrated Learning

Recognizing the importance of demand-driven  education and training, the Government will launch the Post-Secondary Industry  Partnership and Co-operative Placement Initiative in 2016. The Initiative will  support partnerships between employers and willing post-secondary educational  institutions to better align what is taught with the needs of employers. The  Initiative will also support new co-op placements and work-integrated learning  opportunities for young Canadians, with a focus on high-demand fields, such as  science, technology, engineering, mathematics and business. Total costs of this  measure would be $73 million over four years, starting in 2016–17. Further  development of support for co-op placements will be integrated in the  Government’s commitment to advance an Innovation Agenda to spur economic growth  (see Chapter 2—Growth for the Middle Class).

Improving  Employment Insurance

Canada’s  Employment Insurance (EI) program provides economic security to Canadians when  they need it most. For some, help is needed because they have lost their job  through no fault of their own. For others, extra support is required because  they are out of the workforce to raise children or provide care for a loved  one. Whatever the circumstance, no Canadian should struggle to get the  assistance they need.

To better make sure that  Canadians get the help they need, when they need it, the Government is taking  immediate action to improve Employment Insurance. This includes making changes  to the eligibility rules for new entrants and re-entrants, temporarily  enhancing benefits in certain regions, and investing in improved service  delivery. In addition, starting in 2017, the waiting period for benefits will  be reduced. This means that when a worker loses their job and applies for  Employment Insurance, they will be without income for a shorter period of time.

Expanding  Access to Employment Insurance for New Entrants and Re-entrants

Many new workers—such as young Canadians  and recent immigrants—find it difficult to access EI support. At present, new  entrants and re-entrants to the labour market must accumulate at least 910  hours of insurable employment before being eligible for EI regular benefits. Budget  2016 proposes to amend the rules to eliminate the higher EI eligibility  requirements that restrict access for new entrants and re-entrants to the  labour market. With these changes, new entrants and re-entrants will face  the same eligibility requirements as other claimants in the region where  they live. An estimated 50,000 additional claimants will become eligible  for EI benefits as a result of this measure, which will take effect in July  2016.

Eliminating the New Entrant and Re-entrant  Employment Insurance Requirements

Donald lives in Winnipeg, Manitoba, where he  has worked part-time over the past six months since graduating from college. He  was recently laid off.

Under  current EI eligibility rules, Donald would be considered a new entrant to the  labour force. As a result, he would need to have worked at least 910 hours  over the past 52 weeks to qualify for EI benefits. Since Donald only worked 780  hours over this period, he does not qualify for benefits.

Under the  proposed changes, Donald would face the same EI eligibility requirements as  other claimants in his region. As of March 13, 2016, the threshold for  applicants living in Winnipeg is set at 665 hours. Donald would meet this  requirement, and could receive up to 17 weeks of EI benefits while he  looks for new work to start his career.

This  measure is proposed to take effect in July 2016.

Reducing  the Employment Insurance Waiting Period From Two Weeks to One

Under the EI program, claimants must wait  two weeks before they can start receiving benefits. This waiting period acts  like the deductible that must be paid for other types of insurance. Unfortunately,  this delay can make it difficult for some to make ends meet while they wait for  their first EI payment. To help reduce the period of time during which a  claimant is without income, Budget 2016 proposes to make legislative changes to  reduce the EI waiting period from two weeks to one week effective January 1,  2017.

Extending  the Working While on Claim Pilot Project

The Working While on Claim pilot project  helps individuals stay connected to the labour market by ensuring that  claimants always benefit from accepting work. Under the current pilot,  claimants can keep 50 cents of their EI benefits for every dollar they earn, up  to a maximum of 90 per cent of the weekly insurable earnings used to calculate  their EI benefit amount. Budget 2016 proposes to extend the current EI Working  While on Claim pilot project until August 2018. Extending the pilot will allow  time for further assessment to ensure the program works for Canadians. Under the  extended pilot, claimants will be able to have the rules of an earlier pilot,  introduced in 2005, applied to their claims.

Simplifying  Job Search Responsibilities for Employment Insurance Claimants

In 2012, changes were made to the EI  program to specify the type of jobs that unemployed workers are expected to  search for and accept. For some claimants, this has meant having to accept work  at lower rates of pay and with longer commuting times. Budget 2016 proposes to  reverse those changes that strictly define the job search responsibilities of  unemployed workers. The Government will also ensure that there are fair and  flexible supports to assist EI claimants train for and find new employment.

Extending  Employment Insurance Regular Benefits in Affected Regions

Canadians  help each other in hard times and deserve an EI program that reflects that  reality.

The EI  program automatically adjusts to economic conditions by gradually increasing  accessibility and benefits as regional unemployment rates rise. However,  dramatic declines in global oil prices since late 2014 have produced sharp and  sustained unemployment shocks in commodity-based regions.

In response to these unemployment  shocks, Budget 2016 proposes to make legislative changes to extend the duration  of EI regular benefits by 5 weeks, up to a maximum of 50 weeks of  benefits, for all eligible claimants in the 12 EI economic regions that have  experienced the sharpest and most severe increases in unemployment.

Extended benefits will be  available for one year starting in July 2016, with the measure being applied  retroactively to all eligible claims as of January 4, 2015. This measure  will ensure that EI claimants in these 12 regions have the financial  support they need while they search for work.

Budget  2016 also proposes to make legislative changes to offer up to an additional  20 weeks of EI regular benefits to long-tenured workers in the same 12 EI economic  regions, up to a maximum of 70 weeks of benefits.

Extended  benefits for long-tenured workers will be available for one year starting in  July 2016, with the measure being applied retroactively to all eligible  claims as of January 4, 2015. This measure will ensure that  long-tenured workers, who may have spent years working in one industry or for  one employer, have the financial support they need while they search for work,  possibly in an entirely different industry.

Extending Employment Insurance Benefits

Gary lives in Red Deer, Alberta, where he has  worked as a pipefitter in the oil and gas sector earning $60,000 per year for  the past 12 years. He was recently laid off, and he is worried about making  ends meet for his family. The unemployment rate in his region has increased  from 5.4 per cent in February 2015 to 8.3 per cent as of March 13,  2016.

Gary worked  1,750 hours in the 52 weeks prior to losing his job. In his economic region,  this means that he qualifies for up to 40 weeks of EI benefits at a weekly  benefit rate of $537. In total, under the program’s current parameters, Gary  will receive $21,480 in income support while he looks for work.

However,  under the temporary measures proposed in Budget 2016, Gary would be entitled to  receive an extra 5 weeks of benefits. In addition, Gary has been paying  maximum EI premiums and has never had a prior claim for benefits. As a result,  he would also qualify to receive up to an additional 20 weeks of benefits  for long-tenured workers. These additional weeks of benefits bring Gary’s total  support under the EI program to 65 weeks of benefits. At his weekly benefit  rate, this equals up to $34,905 in income support.

The  extended weeks of benefits will provide Gary with the peace of mind that he can  provide for his family while he transitions to new employment.

Extending Employment Insurance Benefits

Budget 2016 proposes to extend EI regular  benefits by 5 weeks to all eligible claimants, and to provide up to an  additional 20 weeks of EI regular benefits to long-tenured workers, in the  following EI economic regions:

Newfoundland/Labrador

Sudbury

Northern Ontario

Northern Manitoba

Saskatoon

Northern  Saskatchewan

Calgary

Northern Alberta

Southern Alberta

Northern British Columbia

Whitehorse

Nunavut

In these regions, the unemployment rate increased by two percentage points or more for a sustained period between March 2015 and February 2016, compared to its lowest point between December 2014 and February 2015, without showing significant signs of recovery.

Extending  the Maximum Duration of Work-Sharing Agreements

Work-Sharing helps employers and employees  avoid layoffs when there is a temporary reduction in the normal level of  business activity that is beyond the control of the employer. Work-Sharing  provides income support to employees eligible for EI benefits who work a  temporarily reduced work schedule while their employer recovers.

Budget 2016 proposes to extend the maximum  duration of Work‑Sharing agreements from 38 weeks to 76 weeks across Canada.  Extended Work-Sharing agreements will help employers retain skilled employees  and avoid the costs of recruiting and training new employees when business  returns to normal levels. They also enable employees to continue working and  maintain their skills while supplementing their wages  with EI benefits for the days they are not working.

Making  Employment Insurance Service Delivery More Responsive

Between December 2014 and December  2015, EI claims increased 7.8 per cent and the number of EI beneficiaries  increased 7.3 per cent nationally. To ensure that Canadians get  timely access to the benefits to which they are entitled, Budget 2016 proposes  to provide $19 million in 2016–17 to enable Service Canada to meet the  increased demand for EI claims processing, and offer better support to  Canadians as they search for new employment.

Enhancing  Access to Employment Insurance Call Centres

EI Call Centre agents provide support to  Canadians who require assistance to submit EI claim information or need to  check the status of their EI claims. Budget 2016 proposes to invest  $73 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to improve access to EI Call Centres. This investment will increase  the number of call centre agents, which will reduce waiting times and ensure  that Canadians can access the information and support they need to receive  their EI benefits as quickly as possible.

Strengthening  the Integrity of the Employment Insurance Program

Canadians expect sound stewardship and  accountability of the EI program, which is funded through premiums paid by  employers and workers. To ensure that benefits help those in need, Budget 2016 proposes  to direct $21 million over three years, starting in 2016–17, to promote  compliance with program rules.

In addition, the Government is committed to  further improving EI. This includes making Compassionate Care Benefits easier  to access, more flexible and more inclusive for those who provide care for  seriously ill family members, and providing more flexibility in parental leave  benefits to better accommodate unique family and work situations. These  objectives will be advanced over the course of the Government’s mandate.

Investing  in Skills and Training

In today’s rapidly  changing economy, Canadians need to obtain the skills and training necessary to  qualify for well-paying jobs, both now and in the future. While Canada’s labour  force is already highly skilled, there are opportunities to further improve  Canada’s performance by helping middle class Canadians, and those working hard  to join it, obtain the skills and training needed to participate fully in the  labour market. That is why Budget 2016 proposes additional investments in  skills training to help Canadians succeed and to strengthen the middle  class.

Enhancing  Investments in Training

Through agreements with provinces and  territories, the Government funds a range of training and employment  programs for unemployed and underemployed Canadians. These programs provide  Canadians opportunities to develop and upgrade their skills and to access  job search tools and career counselling. Through the Labour Market Development  Agreements, the Government provides $1.95 billion each year to provinces and  territories to support unemployed workers who are eligible for Employment  Insurance. For those who are not eligible for Employment Insurance, the  Government provides $500 million each year to provinces and territories through  the Canada Job Fund Agreements. Budget 2016 proposes to provide an additional  $125 million in 2016–17 for the Labour Market Development Agreements, and an  additional $50 million in 2016–17 for the Canada Job Fund Agreements. These  investments will help ensure unemployed and underemployed Canadians can access  the training and supports they need to develop their skills and pursue  opportunities for a better future.

This is the first step in the Government’s  plan to boost support for skills and training through these agreements. The  Government will conduct broad-based consultations with provinces, territories and  stakeholders in 2016–17 to identify ways to improve these agreements and guide  future investments to strengthen labour market programming.

Strengthening  Union-Based Apprenticeship Training

A skilled,  mobile and certified skilled trades workforce is built upon high-quality  apprenticeship training systems. Apprentices work and learn in a variety of  settings, including on-the-job, at colleges and polytechnics, and through  union-based training centres. To strengthen the role of union-based training  providers, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $85.4 million over five  years, starting in 2016–17, to develop a new framework to support union-based  apprenticeship training. As well as improving the quality of training through  investments in equipment, the framework will seek to incorporate greater union  involvement in apprenticeship training and support innovative approaches and  partnerships with other stakeholders, including employers.

Investing  in Adult Basic Education in the North

The Northern Adult Basic Education Program  provides targeted funding to northern colleges to expand and improve their  adult basic education services and leverage their existing network of learning  infrastructure.

To support the delivery of adult basic  education services by colleges in the territories, Budget 2016 proposes to  provide $3.9 million in 2016–17 to extend the Northern Adult Basic Education  Program for one year. During this time, the Government will review the program  with a view to determining how to best support the participation of Northerners  in the labour market.

Increasing  the Northern Residents Deduction

To help draw skilled labour to northern and  isolated communities, Budget 2016 proposes to increase the maximum daily  residency deduction to $22 from $16.50. This measure will be effective as of  January 1, 2016 and is estimated to reduce federal revenues by about  $255 million over the 2015–16 to 2020–21 period.

Supporting  Flexible Work Arrangements

Many Canadians struggle to balance the  responsibilities of work and family, which can affect their overall well-being  and productivity at work. Flexible work arrangements, such as flexible start  and finish times or the ability to work from home, can help employees to balance  these responsibilities. The Government will explore ways to ensure that federally  regulated employees are better able to manage the demands of paid work and  their personal and family responsibilities outside of work.

Labour  Market Information for Canadians

Access to timely, reliable, and  comprehensive labour market information is critical to ensure that all  Canadians, including students, workers, employers and educators, have the  information they need to make informed decisions. The Government remains  committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to provide  information that will equip Canadians with the tools to access a broad range of  job opportunities.

Introducing  a Teacher and Early Childhood Educator School Supply Tax Credit

In recognition of the costs educators  often incur at their own expense for supplies that enrich our children’s  learning environment, Budget 2016 proposes a new Teacher and Early Childhood  Educator School Supply Tax Credit. The proposed 15-per-cent refundable income  tax credit will apply on up to $1,000 of eligible supplies (such as paper, glue  and paint for art projects, games and puzzles, and supplementary books). The  proposal will apply to the 2016 and subsequent tax years and will provide a  benefit worth about $140 million over the 2015–16 to 2020–21 period.



<<< source: ch2-en.html >>>

Chapter 2 - Growth for the Middle Class

Introduction

In the last century, it was Canada’s growing and optimistic middle class that built a better country—not just for themselves, but for their children and grandchildren.

The investments they made in Canada’s future prosperity improved the quality of life for every generation that followed. It’s time for Canada to once again make smart, strategic investments that will grow Canada’s economy and make it an even better place to call home.

Canada’s middle class will benefit from the immediate help provided by Budget 2016, but ongoing growth is equally important. By investing in infrastructure now—in the projects Canada needs and the people who can build them—growth for the middle class can be secured well into the future.

At the same time, to deliver new results, Canada must try new things. In Budget 2016, the Government is defining a new vision for Canada’s economy: Canada as a centre of global innovation.

Together, investments in infrastructure and in innovation will form the foundation for a more inclusive society—one that delivers stronger growth and a better quality of life for the middle class and those working hard to join it.

Investing in Infrastructure to Create Jobs and Prosperity for the Middle Class

Investing in infrastructure creates good, well-paying jobs that can help the middle class grow and prosper today. And by making it easier to move people and products, well-planned infrastructure can deliver sustained economic growth for years to come.

At the same time, new challenges have emerged that make the need for investment more acute: things like the rapid growth of Canada’s cities, climate change, and threats to our water and land.

Congestion in Canadian communities makes life more difficult for busy families, and has a negative effect on our economy—when businesses can’t get their goods to market, it undermines growth.

A changing climate is also hard on communities. From floodways to power grids, investments are needed to make sure Canada’s communities remain safe and resilient places to live.

Investing in infrastructure is not just about creating good jobs and economic growth. It’s also about building communities that Canadians are proud to call home.

With historic investments in public transit, green infrastructure and social infrastructure, Budget 2016 will take advantage of historically low interest rates to renew Canada’s infrastructure and improve the quality of life for all Canadians.

In Budget 2016, the Government will implement an historic plan to invest more than $120 billion in infrastructure over 10 years, to better meet the needs of Canadians and better position Canada’s economy for the future.

The Government’s plan will be implemented in two phases.

In addition to funding flowing through the existing programs that support infrastructure, the Government will implement a short-term Phase 1 plan to immediately invest in the infrastructure Canadians need—to modernize and rehabilitate public transit, water and wastewater systems, provide affordable housing, and protect existing infrastructure from the effects of climate change. Phase 1 focuses primarily on infrastructure investments over the next two years.

Phase 2 will deliver on the remaining eight years of the Government’s long-term infrastructure plan. In this phase, the goals will be broader and more ambitious: a more modern, cleaner economy; a more inclusive society; and an economy better positioned to capitalize on the potential of global trade.

This second phase will go hand in hand with the transition to a low-carbon economy. It will make Canada’s largest cities better places to live, through cost-effective, sustainable, integrated transportation networks. And it will aim to deliver fast, efficient trade corridors that allow Canadian exporters to benefit fully from international trade.

In making its investments, the Government will balance support for projects of different size and scope—both those of local and regional importance, and larger, economically strategic projects that can provide transformative change at the national level.

A long-term infrastructure investment plan is an opportunity to make meaningful contributions to Canada’s economic growth and sustainable development by addressing important infrastructure challenges of national significance. Ambitious projects will be supported to reduce urban transportation congestion, improve and expand trade corridors, and reduce the carbon footprint of the national energy system.

New institutions could provide Canada an opportunity to improve infrastructure management across the country by working with our partners to:

Pursue evidence-based decision-making, arrived at through independent, expert advice;

Examine new innovative financing instruments to reduce the cost of municipal infrastructure projects so that more are built and they get started earlier;

Where it is in the public interest, engage public pension plans and other innovative sources of funding—such as demand management initiatives and asset recycling—to increase the long-term affordability and sustainability of infrastructure in Canada; and

Better support the use of state-of-the-art infrastructure technology to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of existing assets.

The Government will engage with its provincial, territorial, municipal and Indigenous partners, as well as global institutional investors and other stakeholders, and will announce Phase 2 of the long-term plan in the next year.

Phase 1 of Canada’s New Infrastructure Plan

Starting with Budget 2016, Canadians will see real investments made in their communities. Immediate investments that will create jobs and support clean growth across the country.

Phase 1 of the Government’s infrastructure plan proposes to provide $11.9 billion over five years, starting right away. Budget 2016 puts this plan into action with an immediate down payment on this plan, including:

$3.4 billion over three years to upgrade and improve public transit systems across Canada;

$5.0 billion over five years for investments in water, wastewater and green infrastructure projects across Canada; and

$3.4 billion over five years for social infrastructure, including affordable housing, early learning and child care, cultural and recreational infrastructure, and community health care facilities on reserve. 1

The Department of Finance estimates that these and other measures announced in Budget 2016 will raise the level of real gross domestic product by 0.5 per cent in the first year and by 1.0 per cent by the second year (see Annex 2—Economic Impacts of Budget Measures, for details).

This approach is in line with recommendations by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the International Monetary Fund, which have argued that governments with the fiscal flexibility to undertake productivity-enhancing investments should do so—both to boost demand in the short term and lay a solid foundation for long-term growth.

The Government is also taking action to ensure that Canadians benefit from the better services that more modern, efficient and sustainable federal infrastructure can provide. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $3.4 billion over the next five years, on a cash basis, to maintain and upgrade federal infrastructure assets such as national parks, small craft harbours, federal airports and border infrastructure. This funding will also support the clean-up of contaminated sites across the country.

In addition to the new funding announced in Budget 2016, the Government will support the infrastructure priorities of communities across Canada. The Government will:

Continue to make available approximately $3 billion each year in dedicated funding for municipal infrastructure projects through the Gas Tax Fund and the incremental Goods and Services Tax Rebate for Municipalities;

Work with provincial, territorial and municipal partners to get projects underway, by accelerating spending from the $9 billion available under the New Building Canada Fund’s Provincial-Territorial Infrastructure Component and other existing infrastructure programs;

Transfer remaining uncommitted funds from older federal infrastructure programs to municipalities through the Gas Tax Fund in 2016–17 in order to ensure funds are directed towards municipal infrastructure priorities in the near term; and

Ensure that Government institutions are aligned to best support infrastructure innovation, including by transferring responsibility for PPP Canada Inc. to the Minister of Infrastructure and Communities.

With Budget 2016, the Government is launching a transformative plan to invest almost $60 billion in new infrastructure funding.

Budget 2016 lays the groundwork for future growth, by making immediate investments in public transit, green infrastructure and social infrastructure. These investments represent $11.9 billion of the Government’s 10-year commitment. In the coming months, the Government will lay out its longer-term priorities for renewing and modernizing Canada’s infrastructure.

Building Strong Cities Through Investments in Public Transit

Canadian cities have been growing at a rapid rate, but investment in public transit has not kept pace. This has led to more traffic congestion, and long commutes that make it harder for people to get to work and for families to spend time together.

The gridlock that results has a serious financial impact—costing Canada’s economy billions of dollars in lost productivity each year—and is damaging to the environment.

To improve and expand public transit systems across Canada, Budget 2016 proposes to invest up to $3.4 billion in public transit over three years, starting in 2016–17. Funding will be provided through a new Public Transit Infrastructure Fund.

These investments will help to shorten commute times, cut air pollution, strengthen communities and grow Canada’s economy.

Canadians need immediate investments in their communities’ public transit systems, so that they can get to work on time, and back home at the end of a long day. The Public Transit Infrastructure Fund will make these long overdue investments. Funding will be provided to support projects that will deliver increased capacity, enhanced service or improved environmental outcomes. Projects could include:

Upgrades to subway tracks, bridges, signals and switches for the Montreal Metro;

Fleet replacement, including the purchase of new subway cars, low-floor buses, and street cars by the Toronto Transit Commission; and

Accelerated design, implementation and construction work for new large-scale projects, such as new light rail transit lines in Greater Vancouver and Ottawa.

To get projects moving quickly, the Government will fund up to 50 per cent of eligible costs for projects. Funding under the program will be allocated to municipalities based on ridership, as per the table below.

Investing in Green Infrastructure

To ensure that Canada’s communities are healthy and productive places to live, Budget 2016 proposes to invest $5.0 billion over the next five years in infrastructure that protects communities and supports Canada’s ongoing transition to a clean growth economy.

These investments will help Canadian communities adapt to the challenges of climate change. As referenced in Chapter 4—A Clean Growth Economy, the Government will invest in electric vehicle and alternative transportation fuel infrastructure, initiatives to foster regional electricity cooperation, and the development of building codes and standards that integrate climate resiliency requirements.

There is also an urgent need in many Canadian communities to modernize water and wastewater infrastructure. Working with provinces, territories, municipalities and First Nations communities, the Government will invest in this essential infrastructure, and will seek out new partnerships on innovative green infrastructure projects and capacity-building programs.

Building Capacity in Municipalities to Address Climate Change

From reducing greenhouse gas emissions to transforming the way we live, work and move around our communities, municipalities are on the front lines of serving Canadians. When it comes to issues like climate change—a significant challenge that will affect every community in different ways—help from other orders of government is needed.

To support municipalities’ front-line efforts, the Government has announced $75 million in new funding for local governments to address climate change, to be delivered by the Federation of Canadian Municipalities. This investment will support municipality-led projects to identify and implement greenhouse gas reduction opportunities. It will also support the assessment of local climate risks, and the integration of these impacts into asset management plans.

Funding Innovative Green Municipal Projects

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $125 million over the next two years to the Federation of Canadian Municipalities to enhance the Green Municipal Fund, including for projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This Fund, established in partnership with municipalities in 2000, finances and funds innovative, municipal green infrastructure priorities, and has provided over $700 million to projects across the country since its inception.

The Green Municipal Fund supports projects across Canada that produce tangible benefits for communities through improved environmental, economic and social outcomes. Recently funded initiatives include:

The expansion of the successful Halifax Solar City pilot to install solar hot water systems and efficient water fixtures in homes; and

Canada’s first “net-zero” municipal library in Varennes, Quebec, which will generate as much energy as it consumes on an annual basis.

Developing Community Capacity for Asset Management Best Practices

The Government is also proposing a new $50 million capacity-building fund to support the use of asset management best practices across Canada. Asset management plans guide how core infrastructure assets are to be built, renewed, operated, maintained and replaced. This type of planning helps to maximize the use of public dollars. Smaller communities, in particular, have indicated that they lack corporate capacity to undertake these important planning activities. This funding will be delivered through the Federation of Canadian Municipalities and will strengthen capacity-building in communities for longer-term planning that supports strategic investments.

In addition, Infrastructure Canada will work with Statistics Canada to improve infrastructure-related data. This will support better information on the state and performance of core public infrastructure assets for all levels of government.

Adaptation and Climate Resilient Infrastructure

Canada’s future prosperity rests on its ability to adapt to new challenges, including those that result from climate change and other threats to water and land. The Government is committed to working with provincial, territorial and municipal partners to invest in shared priorities that help grow Canada’s clean economy while helping communities better prepare for these future challenges.

Many communities have already identified projects that are ready for immediate investment by the federal government, including:

$248 million for the Lake Manitoba and Lake St. Martin Outlet Channels Project. This project will allow the Province of Manitoba to regulate lake levels and provide flood protection to individuals, businesses and communities around these lakes. Without enhanced water control infrastructure, there is a high risk of recurring flood damage, similar to that experienced in 2011; and

$212 million to upgrade the Lions Gate Wastewater Treatment Plant to make it resilient to climate events. This facility provides primary treatment of wastewater for residents of the District of West Vancouver, the City of North Vancouver and the District of North Vancouver, and is threatened by risks posed by extreme weather and climate change (such as a projected rise in sea levels).

Sustaining Healthy Communities Through a New Clean Water and Wastewater Fund

Water and wastewater infrastructure is essential to keeping our waterways clean and our communities healthy and livable. Many systems across Canada need urgent improvements to ensure that Canadian families continue to have access to clean water. There are also high-risk wastewater facilities across the country that will require upgrades by 2020 in order to meet new, stronger federal environmental regulations.

To address these needs, the Government is announcing a new Clean Water and Wastewater Fund for provinces, territories and municipalities. Budget 2016 proposes to invest $2.0 billion over four years, starting in 2016–17, for immediate improvements to water distribution and treatment infrastructure.

In addition to delivering support for urgent provincial, territorial and municipal water and wastewater priorities, funding will be delivered to communities this year, on an expedited basis. To get projects moving quickly, the Government will fund up to 50 per cent of eligible costs for projects. Investment in this Fund will improve the safety and quality of water for Canadian families, while supporting job creation and a clean growth economy.

Budget 2016 also proposes to provide $1.8 billion over five years to address health and safety needs, to ensure proper facility operation and maintenance, and to end long-term boil water advisories on First Nations reserves within five years, as referenced in Chapter 3—A Better Future for Indigenous Peoples.

In addition to the new investments announced in Budget 2016, the Government has committed to accelerate spending for infrastructure projects under existing programs.

The Government is working on an urgent basis with its provincial, territorial and municipal partners to deliver these investments as quickly as possible.

Recent federal support for important projects include:

Over $73.3 million in funding from the federal Gas Tax Fund for 57 capital and

capacity-building projects in communities across British Columbia, including drinking water, wastewater, recreational and cultural infrastructure, local roads and bridges, community energy systems and improvements for passengers at the Smithers Regional Airport;

Almost $5.4 million from the Small Communities Fund for water and wastewater projects in 11 communities across Saskatchewan, all of which have populations of less than 2,000, including the village of Yarbo. This investment will help ensure safe drinking water and expanded or improved wastewater systems in these communities for years to come;

$62 million for the Ottawa Combined Sewage Storage Tunnel under the New Building Canada Fund’s Provincial-Territorial Infrastructure Component to reduce combined sewer overflows to the Ottawa River;

$17.1 million in funding from the Gas Tax Fund to upgrade four drinking water treatment and distribution systems in Sherbrooke, Quebec. This investment supports the modernization of critical sustainable infrastructure and provides the residents of Sherbrooke with high-quality drinking water;

$19 million for the Sydney Harbour West Wastewater Collection and Treatment Plant in Nova Scotia to bring wastewater treatment services in the area up to federal environmental regulatory standards and support expansions, upgrades and modifications to existing wastewater collection infrastructure;

Up to $25.3 million from the Small Communities Fund to support five recreational and sport facility projects in Nunavut, including a cultural centre in Cape Dorset, repairs for the Cambridge Bay Arena and the Iqaluit Aquatic Centre; and

$583 million towards the development of the Calgary ring road is being reviewed for funding through the New Building Canada Fund’s National Infrastructure Component. This project would provide Albertans with a safe, modern highway network that would improve travel times in and around one of Canada’s most important cities and support economic growth in the province.

Building Stronger Communities

Investing in Canada’s communities is not only about creating good jobs and encouraging clean economic growth. It is also about building stronger communities.

By making new investments in social infrastructure—in things like affordable housing and early learning and child care—Budget 2016 will help strengthen the middle class, promote inclusive growth for Canadians, and lift more Canadians—including children and seniors—out of poverty.

As part of the Government’s Phase 1 commitments, Budget 2016 proposes initial social infrastructure investments totaling $3.4 billion over five years. These investments will help expand affordable housing (including shelters for victims of violence), support early learning and child care, renew cultural and recreational infrastructure, and improve community health care facilities on reserve. As referenced in Chapter 3—A Better Future for Indigenous Peoples, of this new funding, $1.2 billion will be invested in First Nations, Inuit and northern communities.

To ensure that investments reflect the needs of Canadians and Canadian communities, the Government of Canada will consult with stakeholders in the coming months to determine where future investments in social infrastructure should be made.

Expanding Affordable Housing

All Canadians need and deserve housing that is safe, adequate and affordable. Without it, Canadians feel less secure and that makes it harder to accomplish every other goal—from raising healthy children to pursuing education, jobs and opportunity. When affordable housing is in short supply, Canada’s whole economy suffers.

To give Canadians greater access to more affordable housing, Budget 2016 proposes to invest $2.3 billion over two years, starting in 2016–17. Of this amount, $2.2 billion reflects the Government’s commitment to invest in social infrastructure, including $739 million for First Nations, Inuit and northern housing. A significant portion of the $2.3 billion investment will be allocated to provinces and territories, which can identify communities where the need for affordable housing is greatest. Investing in affordable housing will provide targeted support to those who need it most and create good jobs that help grow Canada’s economy in a clean and sustainable way.

To ensure that these investments are most effective and to help the social housing sector achieve self-reliance, the Government will consult with provinces and territories, Indigenous and other communities, and key stakeholders in the coming year to develop a National Housing Strategy.

Doubling the Investment in Affordable Housing Initiative

In response to the persistent, high demand for affordable housing across the country, Budget 2016 proposes to double current federal funding under the Investment in Affordable Housing initiative. Under this initiative, provinces and territories match federal investments and have the flexibility to design and deliver programs that are tailored to address local housing needs and pressures.

To support the construction of new affordable housing units, the renovation and repair of existing affordable housing, measures to support housing affordability such as rent supplements, and measures to foster safe, independent living, the Government will invest $504.4 million over two years, starting in 2016–17. This increased support is expected to benefit more than 100,000 Canadian households.

Increasing Affordable Housing for Seniors

Canada’s senior population is growing, and many seniors now find it difficult to afford housing that is suitable, or that allows them to easily stay in their homes as long as possible.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $200.7 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to support the construction, repair and adaption of affordable housing for seniors. While funding will be provided under the Investment in Affordable Housing initiative, provinces and territories will not be required to cost-match these investments. This investment is expected to help improve housing conditions for more than 5,000 low-income senior households.

Supporting Energy and Water Efficiency Retrofits and Renovations to Existing Social Housing

In addition to support provided under the Investment in Affordable Housing initiative, the Government provides ongoing support to 570,000 social housing units across Canada. Many of these units are older, equipped with less efficient energy and water systems and are urgently in need of repairs.

To support these necessary retrofits and renovations, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $573.9 million over two years, starting in 2016–17. This investment will help address the increasing demand for repairs as social housing units age, and will also improve efficiency and reduce energy use, lowering utility costs and making housing more affordable. By improving water and energy efficiency, this investment will also help the social housing sector contribute to Canada’s overall plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Providing Rent Subsidies for Federally Administered Social Housing Providers

The Government provides support for social housing through long-term operating agreements with social housing providers. As these agreements expire, some federally administered social housing providers may struggle to continue serving low-income households without increasing rental rates. Budget 2016 proposes to reallocate $30 million over two years, starting in
  2016–17, to help these providers maintain rent-geared-to-income for households living in social housing. This additional support would be provided on a time-limited basis until long-term approaches to help the social housing sector achieve self-reliance can be developed through consultations with provinces, territories and stakeholders.

Supporting the Construction of Affordable Rental Housing

Not all Canadians can afford to—or wish to—own their own home. As a result, affordable rental housing is an important part of the housing continuum, providing housing options for many households, including low- and middle-income Canadians, seniors and new immigrants.

To encourage the construction of affordable rental housing, Budget 2016 proposes to invest $208.3 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, in an Affordable Rental Housing Innovation Fund, to be administered by the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation. Funding would be used to test innovative business approaches—such as housing models with a mix of rental and home ownership—to lower the costs and risks of financing affordable rental housing projects. This investment is expected to support the construction of up to 4,000 new affordable housing rental units over five years, and is being made over and above investments in affordable housing under the Government’s social infrastructure commitment.

Going forward, Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation will also consult with stakeholders on the design of an Affordable Rental Housing Financing Initiative to provide low-cost loans to municipalities and housing developers for the construction of new affordable rental housing projects. Up to $500 million in loans would be available each year for five years. This initiative would encourage the construction of affordable rental housing by making low-cost capital available to developers during the earliest, most risky phases of development. This initiative could support the construction of more than 10,000 new rental units over five years.

Supporting Shelters for Victims of Violence

No person fleeing domestic violence should be left without a place to turn. To this end, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $89.9 million over two years, beginning in 2016–17, for the construction and renovation of shelters and transition houses for victims of family violence. While funding will be provided under the Investment in Affordable Housing initiative, provinces and territories will not be required to cost-match these investments. This unprecedented investment is expected to support the construction or renovation of over 3,000 shelters spaces over the next two years.

Tackling Homelessness

Homelessness is a reality for too many Canadians and a challenge for every Canadian community.

To help homeless Canadians find stable housing, Budget 2016 proposes to invest an additional $111.8 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, in the Homelessness Partnering Strategy. Through this Strategy, the Government provides direct support and funding to communities across Canada for projects to prevent and reduce homelessness, including Housing First initiatives that help homeless Canadians secure stable housing while providing them with support for underlying issues, such as mental health or addiction. This investment will give communities the support they need to help prevent and reduce homelessness, including Housing First activities, better emergency response services, and supports for youth, women fleeing violence, and veterans.

Supporting Early Learning and Child Care

For Canadian families, high-quality, affordable child care is more than a convenience—it’s a necessity. The Government recognizes the deep connection between child care and the economic security of families, and proposes to invest $500 million in 2017–18 to support the establishment of a National Framework on Early Learning and Child Care. Of this amount, $100 million would be for Indigenous child care and early learning on reserve.

Because child care needs vary from family to family, and because provinces and territories have responded to those needs in different ways, the Framework will be designed to meet the needs of Canadian families, wherever they live.

Developing the Framework will begin in 2016–17, and will be a joint effort—the Government, provinces, territories and Indigenous peoples will all contribute to its creation. Investments under the new Framework are expected to flow in 2017–18.

Investing in Cultural and Recreational Infrastructure

Cultural and recreational infrastructure—places like community centres, museums, parks and arenas—helps to make our communities feel like home. In many communities, these are the places where families can play together, where neighbours can meet, and where Canadians can celebrate the many cultures that make Canada so diverse.

To support these important parts of our communities, Budget 2016 proposes to invest $168.2 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, in the Canada Cultural Spaces Fund. This Fund supports the renovation and construction of arts and heritage facilities, and recipients would include not-for-profit arts and heritage organizations, provincial and territorial governments, municipalities and their agencies, and equivalent Indigenous peoples’ institutions.

In addition, to celebrate the 150 th anniversary of Canada’s Confederation, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $150 million to the Regional Development Agencies over two years, starting in 2016–17. This funding, which is cost-shared with municipalities, community organizations and non-profit entities, will support projects to renovate, expand and improve existing community and cultural infrastructure in all regions of the country, including projects that advance a clean growth economy.

Improving Community Accessibility

It is important that Canadians with disabilities have the ability to fully participate in their communities. Budget 2016 proposes to provide an additional $4 million over two years, starting in 2016–17 for the Enabling Accessibility Fund to support the capital costs of construction and renovation related to improving physical accessibility and safety for people with disabilities in Canadian communities.

National Historic Sites

The National Historic Sites Cost-Sharing Program is delivered by the Parks Canada Agency and provides funding to non-federally owned or administered national historic sites to help protect nationally significant cultural infrastructure. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $20 million over two years, beginning in 2016–17, to the Parks Canada Agency to enhance the program, including expanding it to include heritage lighthouses and railways. This funding will help to ensure that Canada’s national historic sites are maintained for future generations.

Budget 2016 proposes to make historic investments of $3.5 billion over five years to support infrastructure in Indigenous communities as part of broader investments in green and social infrastructure:

$1.8 billion over five years to support clean drinking water and the treatment of wastewater on reserve;

$409.0 million over five years to improve garbage and waste management on reserve;

$270.2 million over five years to expand and enhance health facilities in First Nations communities;

$732.0 million over two years to address housing needs on reserve and in Inuit and northern communities;

$129.4 million over two years for repairs and renovations of Indigenous early learning and child care facilities and to support the establishment of a Framework on Early Learning and Child Care;

$76.9 million over two years to support the construction of cultural and recreational communities on reserve; and

$10.4 million over three years for renovations and the construction of new shelters for victims of family violence in First Nations communities.

Assisting Homeowners Affected by Pyrrhotite

Homeownership is a goal that many Canadians work hard to reach and it is an investment that they want to protect. Unfortunately, some homes in certain regions of Quebec have had serious and costly structural problems as a result of the presence of the mineral pyrrhotite in their foundations. In response, the Government of Quebec has provided significant financial support to affected homeowners to replace foundations and undertake other necessary repairs. To help more homeowners dealing with the consequences of pyrrhotite, the Government will provide up to $30 million over three years, starting in 2016–17.

Improving Access for Rural Communities to the Digital Economy

Few jobs, sectors or aspects of life are untouched by information and communications technology. Access to better, more reliable broadband connections will provide Canadians in rural and remote communities with new opportunities to participate in the digital economy and to take advantage of advances in telehealth, e-learning and remote access to government services.

Budget 2016 proposes to deliver on the Government’s priority of increasing high-speed broadband coverage by investing up to $500 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, for a new program to extend and enhance broadband service in rural and remote communities.

Further details on program parameters will be announced in the coming months.

Revitalizing Federal Public Infrastructure Across Canada

The Government of Canada owns a significant infrastructure portfolio across the country. This federal infrastructure is significant and touches every aspect of life in Canada—it facilitates the movement of goods and people, it ensures the safety of our food and security at our borders, and it brings Canadians together to celebrate our rich and storied past. It is also critical for enhancing productivity and growth in our economy, and contributes to the health and well-being of Canadians, by providing core services such as transport, water, electricity and energy.

Canadians are affected when the federal infrastructure they rely upon is not adequately maintained. This can result in the deterioration of roads, highways, bridges and dams, as well as buildings and laboratories, ports and airports. The Government has a responsibility to Canadians not only to address these assets in need of repair, but also to use the opportunity to enhance clean growth—by focusing on reducing our carbon footprint and pursuing green solutions wherever possible.

With interest rates at historic lows, now is the ideal time for the Government to invest in revitalizing this infrastructure, to ensure that it continues to serve a vital role in our economy and for the benefit of all Canadians, from coast to coast to coast.

Accelerating Federal Infrastructure Investments

Important projects to improve the state of Canada’s federal infrastructure will commence in 2016—creating new jobs and opportunities for businesses across the country. In addition to the immediate benefits in terms of job creation across the country in the construction, engineering and manufacturing sectors, as well as the generation of significant economic spinoff activity, these investments will also ensure that Canadians continue to benefit from modern, efficient and sustainable infrastructure that is the foundation of our quality of life and long-term prosperity.

Budget 2016 proposes to invest up to $3.4 billion over the next five years, on a cash basis, to maintain and upgrade federal infrastructure assets that provide services all Canadians rely on:

Canada is a vast and beautiful country, endowed with breathtaking, awe-inspiring natural areas. To ensure that Canadians can continue to enjoy our world-class national parks system, up to $191 million will be invested on trails and highways in national parks.

Harbours are critical infrastructure components of our transportation system, relied on daily by our fishing industry and recreational users. Commercial fishers and recreational boaters will benefit from up to $149 million in investments that will revitalize small craft harbours across the country.

Environmental stewardship is part of our obligation to ensure that future generations can live in a clean world. To reduce risks to human health and the environment, funding of up to $217 million will be provided for environmental remediation work on contaminated sites.

The federal government has an important role to play in advancing science, research and innovation, the pillars of strong and advanced economies. Federal laboratories and other federal assets that support science, research and innovation, will receive up to $139 million.

To modernize and preserve some of Canada’s world-class cultural infrastructure for future generations to enjoy, up to $281 million will be provided to support the construction of a new collection and conservation centre for the Canada Science and Technology Museum; the renewal of the National Arts Centre’s performance venues; and repairs to the National Gallery of Canada, including its iconic windows.

Canadians look to their governments to keep them safe and secure. Providing reliable infrastructure for its citizens to use, ensuring that safety threats are mitigated against, and preventing harmful and unlawful acts are core responsibilities of any government. The Government will invest up to $232 million in safety and security. Funding will support National Defence infrastructure, as well as the safety of public and marine infrastructure at Canadian Coast Guard bases.

Funding of up to $91 million will also be provided in support of key government services, including transportation infrastructure for airports and ferries.

Offering high-quality services to Canadians requires assets that are in a good state of repair. The Government will invest up to $2.1 billion towards repairs and retrofits to its wide range of properties and buildings, as well as the greening of government operations. Examples will include funding to improve military housing, upgrade border infrastructure, modernize the generation of energy for marine communication and traffic services, and reduce the carbon footprint and energy consumption of federal buildings in the National Capital Region.

This funding is over and above the Government’s commitment to provide nearly $60 billion in new infrastructure funding over the next 10 years.

Public Services and Procurement Canada manages six heating and cooling plants that provide services to 85 buildings in the National Capital Region. These plants currently generate an average of 117 kilotons of greenhouse gas emissions annually and are in need of major recapitalization. As per the Government’s commitment to provide leadership on climate change, the Government will take this opportunity to recalibrate these plants by implementing more efficient technologies, which will both reduce long-term costs for the Government and greenhouse gas emissions—the latter by more than 45 per cent going forward. In addition, the new technology will enable the Government to explore the feasibility of using biomass as an alternative source of energy, the adoption of which could further reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Supporting Water Infrastructure in Saskatchewan

Dams and other water control structures in southern Saskatchewan support the irrigation needs of farmers and ranchers, provide recreational opportunities for Canadian families, and assist in ensuring communities have access to clean and sustainable water sources.

The Government is committed to working collaboratively with the Government of Saskatchewan to continue the transfer of federally owned dams to the Saskatchewan Water Security Agency to better serve Saskatchewan’s water and water infrastructure needs.

The Government of Canada is the owner and operator of a number of transportation assets—including ports and airports—that support safe, secure and efficient transportation systems. As part of the federal infrastructure initiative, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $186.6 million on a cash basis for federal transportation assets. Specific investments will include:

$148.6 million for small craft harbour infrastructure improvements, including major capital construction projects on wharves, floats, breakwaters, and shore protection, to ensure a network of safe and accessible harbours for use by commercial fish harvesters across Canada;

$23 million to upgrade fire safety capability and rehabilitate or replace structures such as terminal buildings and hangars at six rural and remote airports—Wabush and St. Anthony in Newfoundland and Labrador; Îles de la Madeleine in Quebec; and Sandspit, Penticton and Port Hardy in British Columbia;

$6.7 million for infrastructure upgrades at the Port of Gros-Cacouna, Quebec, to promote the continued safe operation of the port; and

$8.3 million for improvements to Transport Canada facilities used for aircraft testing and certification, including the Aircraft Services Hangar located at Ottawa Macdonald-Cartier International Airport.

Improving Rail Service

For nearly 40 years, VIA Rail Canada Inc. has provided passenger rail services connecting communities across the country. VIA Rail carried 3.8 million passengers in 2015, across a 12,500-kilometre rail network serving 450 cities and towns that extends from Prince Rupert, British Columbia to Halifax, Nova Scotia. The vast majority of passengers (over 90 per cent) travelled within the high-density Windsor-Quebec City corridor.

VIA Rail faces significant capital investment requirements going forward. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $7.7 million in 2016–17 on a cash basis to VIA Rail to support technical studies and other pre-procurement activities related to the renewal of VIA Rail’s fleet, for safety upgrades at grade crossings on tracks owned by VIA Rail, and for investments in improved security at VIA Rail stations.

VIA Rail has developed a proposal for a high-frequency rail service within the Windsor-Quebec City corridor that could see VIA Rail operate on dedicated tracks exclusive to its services. This could permit increased service frequencies, improved on-time performance and reduced trip times. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $3.3 million over three years to Transport Canada to support an in depth assessment of VIA Rail’s high-frequency rail proposal.

As part of the federal infrastructure initiative, Budget 2016 also proposes to provide $34 million, on a cash basis, to VIA Rail for improvements at stations and maintenance centres, including upgrades to mechanical and electrical systems and roof replacements.

Supporting Ferry Services in Atlantic Canada

Ferry services are an important element of the transportation network in Atlantic Canada. Transport Canada provides financial support to routes between
  Îles de la Madeleine, Quebec and Souris, Prince Edward Island; between
  Saint John, New Brunswick and Digby, Nova Scotia; and between Wood Islands, Prince Edward Island and Caribou, Nova Scotia.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $51.9 million in 2016–17 on a cash basis to support the continued operation of these ferry services and for the disposal of the MV Princess of Acadia that has been replaced by the new MV Fundy Rose on the Saint John-Digby route. The MV Fundy Rose meets both national and international environmental standards and emits fewer air pollutants compared to the vessel she replaced.

As part of the federal infrastructure initiative, Budget 2016 also proposes to provide $22 million, on a cash basis, to Marine Atlantic Inc. to install a new mooring system for its ferries operating between Channel-Port aux Basques, Newfoundland and Labrador, and North Sydney, Nova Scotia.

Building A More Innovative Country

The global economy is shifting—technology is transforming the way Canadians access information, buy goods and services, interact with each other and build communities. At the same time, countries around the world are searching for ways to foster clean growth and support healthy and prosperous societies. To drive growth, to improve the livelihoods of Canadians and to create jobs in areas including manufacturing, digital technology and renewable energy, Canada must be on the leading edge of this change. Innovation is today’s driver of inclusive growth, and Canada must be in it to win.

In Budget 2016 the Government is defining a new vision for Canada’s economy: to build Canada as a centre of global innovation. Canada will be propelled by its creative and entrepreneurial citizens; its leading science and technology; its excellent innovation infrastructure; and its globally competitive companies offering high-quality products and services, thriving within a business environment that supports commercialization and growth. Through 2016 and 2017, the Government will define a bold new plan, its Innovation Agenda, to achieve this vision.

Underpinning the Innovation Agenda will be a plan for change.

Through 2016, the Government will redesign and redefine how it supports innovation and growth, in partnership and coordination with the private sector, provinces, territories and municipalities, universities and colleges, and the not-for-profit sector.

The Innovation Agenda will define clear outcomes—objectives and metrics to measure progress towards this vision.

The Government’s plan will be cross-government and coordinated across key departments. Whether it is clean technology, health sciences, advanced manufacturing, digital technology, resource development or agri-food, the Government’s plan will work to align its support for the key ingredients of innovation—helping to propel Canada’s entrepreneurs and innovators from start-up and commercialization stages to global success.

Through alignment, coordination and simplification, the Innovation Agenda will drive greater clarity of purpose to government support for innovation and ultimately greater support for Canada’s innovators and entrepreneurs.

To help realize this vision, Budget 2016 proposes several interim measures to promote research and accelerate business growth by:

Focusing new federal support for science on world-class discovery research;

Maintaining funding for commercialization of promising scientific discoveries and industry take-up of emerging applications;

First steps in orienting federal business support toward firms with ambition to grow, to help ensure they have the resources and support they need to reach their potential; and

Building a better evidence base to identify gaps, evaluate performance and inform future decisions.

Strengthening Science and Research

The Government understands the central role of science in a thriving, clean economy and in providing evidence for sound policy decisions. Canada’s universities, colleges and other research institutions play a fundamental role in Canadian society by developing highly skilled and creative workers. They are also the engines of discovery, and collaborate on innovations that help companies compete and grow. Budget 2016 takes action to reinvigorate Canada’s research and science base by investing in infrastructure at post-secondary institutions and federal laboratories, fostering research excellence, and accelerating the diffusion and commercialization of knowledge into applications that benefit industry and society as a whole.

Strategic Infrastructure Investments at Post Secondary Institutions

The prosperity of Canadians relies on the ability of the country to attract and retain talented people, boost innovation and build a sustainable economy. The quality of infrastructure at Canadian post-secondary institutions plays a key role in these efforts. Through the Canada Foundation for Innovation, the Government of Canada already makes significant investments in research infrastructure at Canada’s universities, colleges and research hospitals. Provinces and territories also provide substantial funding for campus renewal every year. Nonetheless, much of Canada’s post-secondary infrastructure is over 25 years old and nearing the end of its useful life. This presents an opportunity to invest in greener and more innovation-friendly spaces.

Recognizing the value to Canada of strong post-secondary institutions, Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $2 billion over three years, starting in 2016–17, for a new Post-Secondary Institutions Strategic Investment Fund, a time-limited initiative that will support up to 50 per cent of the eligible costs of infrastructure projects at post-secondary institutions and affiliated research and commercialization organizations, in collaboration with provinces and territories. This initiative is aimed at enhancing and modernizing research and commercialization facilities on Canadian campuses, as well as industry-relevant training facilities at college and polytechnic institutions, and projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions and improve the environmental sustainability of these types of facilities.

These targeted, short-term investments in infrastructure projects will promote economic activity across the country and benefits for the Canadian economy and society well into the future. Work is underway, in consultation with the provinces and territories, to implement this initiative as quickly as possible.

The new Fund will support investments of the following types:

A university could convert under-utilized space into new research labs that advance its excellence in a specialized field of strength;

A college could modernize or create sector-specific training facilities, including capacity for advanced areas such as Red Seal trades;

On-campus incubators and accelerators could be expanded to increase and improve support for entrepreneurs and start-ups as they develop strategies to grow their business;

College and university facilities that support prototype development or proof-of-principle assessment could receive investments in order to better serve the needs of industry partners; and

Post-secondary institutions could retrofit existing buildings for research and development or advanced training activities with more energy efficient heating systems and pursue Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design standards.

Strengthening Canada’s World-Class Research Capacity and Excellence

Research at Canadian post-secondary institutions and research hospitals creates new insights and leads to the technology breakthroughs of tomorrow that help to respond to major economic, social and environmental challenges and opportunities. The Government understands that the creation of knowledge and development of highly qualified people are vital for Canada’s prosperity in the global economy.

Budget 2016 is taking action to support the excellence of Canadian research by investing in discovery research through the granting councils and providing additional support to world-class researchers and institutions.

I had no thought of any application of this new knowledge—if it could be obtained—nor did anyone ask me to justify my work in this fashion. The assumption at that date was that if the breakthrough in understanding of nature, that is to say in fundamental or basic science, could be achieved, applications would undoubtedly follow. The assumption turned out to be correct.

Recognizing the fundamental role of investigator-led discovery research in an innovative society, Budget 2016 proposes to provide an additional $95 million per year, starting in 2016–17, on an ongoing basis to the granting councils—the highest amount of new annual funding for discovery research in more than a decade. These funds will be allocated as follows:

$30 million for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research;

$30 million for the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council;

$16 million for the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council; and

$19 million for the Research Support Fund to support the indirect costs borne by post-secondary institutions in undertaking federally sponsored research.

Together with the funding provided to the granting councils in Budget 2015 of $46 million in 2016–17 and ongoing, a total of $141 million in new annual resources will be made available to the granting councils going forward.

Budget 2016 also makes the following investments in attracting and retaining world-class researchers and developing promising discoveries into applications that create value for Canadians.

Promoting Canada as a Destination of Choice to Study and Conduct World-Class Research

Mitacs, a national not-for-profit organization, builds partnerships between academia, industry and the world to create a more innovative Canada. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $14 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to the Mitacs Globalink program. This funding will support 825 internships and fellowships annually, helping Canadian universities to attract top students from around the world and enabling Canadian students to take advantage of training opportunities abroad.

Advancing Canadian Leadership in Genomics

Genome Canada, a not-for-profit organization established in 2000, plays a central role in helping to identify possibilities and seize opportunities for Canada in the accelerating field of genomics. To continue to support leading genomics researchers and promising scientific breakthroughs, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $237.2 million in 2016–17 to support the pan-Canadian activities of Genome Canada to the end of 2019–20.

Commercializing Canada’s World-Class Health Discoveries

Launched in 2007, the Centre for Drug Research and Development is a not-for-profit corporation located in Vancouver on the campus of the University of British Columbia. Its mandate is to identify and translate promising health research discoveries from universities across Canada into new medicines and therapies, a process that is both challenging and costly. To date, the Centre has advanced the commercialization of promising new therapies, secured commitments from leading pharmaceutical firms, attracted foreign investments to Canada, and affirmed its leadership on the global stage by championing the creation of the Global Alliance of Leading Drug Discovery and Development Centres. Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $32 million over two years, starting in 2017–18, to fuel the growth of the Centre’s promising pipeline and contribute to fully reaping the benefits of Canada’s significant investments in health research.

Strengthening Canada’s International Leadership in Stem Cell Research Through the Stem Cell Network

The Stem Cell Network was created in 2001 to act as a catalyst for enabling the translation of stem cell research into clinical applications, commercial products and public policy. To further support Canadian strengths in this highly promising field, Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $12 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to support the Network’s research, training and outreach activities.

Advancing Canada’s Global Standing Through the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics

The Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, Ontario, is an independent centre devoted to foundational research in theoretical physics. Since its creation in 1999, the Institute has built a global reputation for its exceptional research environment and has demonstrated outstanding scientific merit, which has helped to attract top-tier researchers to Canada. The Institute also hosts hundreds of international researchers each year, trains promising new researchers, and undertakes outreach activities with students, teachers and members of the general public. Along with the University of Waterloo’s Institute for Quantum Computing, the Perimeter Institute is a key institution in the region’s Quantum Valley innovation ecosystem, which fuels Canada’s leadership in new quantum technologies expected to transform and create new industries. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $50 million over five years, beginning in 2017–18, to the Perimeter Institute to strengthen its position as a world-leading research centre for theoretical physics. Each federal dollar will be matched by two dollars from the Institute’s other partners.

Supporting Brain Research Through the Brain Canada Foundation

The Brain Canada Foundation is a national, charitable organization that raises funds to foster advances in neuroscience discovery research, with the aim to enhance understanding and improve health care for those affected by neurological injury and disease. To help increase understanding of the brain and brain health, Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $20 million over three years, starting in 2016–17, for the Brain Canada Foundation’s Canada Brain Research Fund, which supports competitively awarded, collaborative, multidisciplinary brain health and brain disorder research projects. Federal funding for this initiative will be matched by resources raised from other non-government partners of the Brain Canada Foundation.

Ensuring Federal Support for Research Is Strategic and Effective

To ensure that federal support for research, including through the granting councils, is strategic and effective, Budget 2016 also announces that the Minister of Science will undertake a comprehensive review of all elements of federal support for fundamental science over the coming year. In order to strengthen the granting councils and Canada’s research ecosystem, the review will:

Assess opportunities to increase the impact of federal support on Canada’s research excellence and the benefits that flow from it;

Examine the rationale for current targeting of granting councils’ funding and bring greater coherence to the diverse range of federal research and development priorities and funding instruments;

Assess the support for promising emerging research leaders; and

Ensure there is sufficient flexibility to respond to emerging research opportunities for Canada, including big science projects and other international collaborations.

Supporting Canada’s Continued Leadership in Space

Canada’s participation in the International Space Station’s earth orbiting research laboratory began over 30 years ago with the original Canadarm, a transformative project that seized the imaginations of researchers, astronauts and ordinary Canadians alike and inspired national pride in Canada’s technological achievements. Since then, Canada has demonstrated a unique ability to develop and deliver leading-edge space technologies such as Canadarm2 and Dextre and to conduct ground-breaking research in the Station’s labs.

To secure Canada’s place in the International Space Station, Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $379 million over eight years, starting in 2017–18, for the Canadian Space Agency to formalize negotiations with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and undertake the necessary activities to extend Canada’s participation to 2024.

Canada will also continue to take part in other important international collaborations with the potential to build on Canada’s strengths and develop the space industry sector’s capabilities. This includes Canada’s continued participation in the European Space Agency’s Advanced Research in Telecommunications Systems program, for which $30 million over four years, starting in 2016–17, was provided in Budget 2015.

Canadarm2, built in Brampton, Ontario, by MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates (MDA), is a 17 metre long robotic arm that assembled the International Space Station while in space. In addition to supporting the Station’s general maintenance and upkeep, it performs “cosmic catches”, capturing and docking unpiloted spacecraft that carry everything from science payloads to supplies for the six astronauts on board the Station.

Dextre, also built by MDA, is known as the International Space Station’s “space handyman” as it performs maintenance work and repairs like changing batteries and placing cameras outside the station. This greatly reduces the risky spacewalks astronauts must take for routine chores and enables them to focus on the main purpose of science.

Thomson Nielsen (now Best Medical Canada) is an Ottawa-based company that partnered with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to develop the technology for the Extravehicular Activity Radiation Monitoring (EVARM) dosimeter, which measures radiation levels in astronauts during spacewalks. The technology detects radiation in the most sensitive parts of the body—the skin, eyes and bone marrow—and is now being used to monitor radiation exposure in 1,000 cancer clinics worldwide.

Growing the Agriculture and Agri Food Sector

The Canadian agriculture and agri-food sector is a vital part of our economy that supports both rural and urban communities across the country. At its foundation are the farmers and ranchers that work hard to feed Canada and the world.

Agriculture is an area of shared responsibility, and the federal government works closely with provincial and territorial governments to deliver agriculture and agri-food programs and services through a federal-provincial-territorial policy framework.

The current five-year policy framework, Growing Forward 2 (2013–18), includes spending of $3 billion by federal, provincial and territorial governments, and emphasizes support for agricultural and agri-food innovation, competitiveness, and market development.

In addition, the framework includes a comprehensive suite of business risk management programs to help farmers manage the risks associated with severe market volatility and disaster situations. The level of support provided under these programs varies with market conditions with average annual federal-provincial-territorial spending of approximately $2 billion.

Moving forward, the Government is committed to supporting an agricultural and agri-food sector that is strong and innovative.

Investing in Agricultural Science

Science and research supports the agriculture and agri-food sector’s productivity and competitiveness by contributing to the development of new products and processes, promoting environmental sustainability, and reducing threats from diseases and pests. Public agricultural research is particularly important in addressing emerging issues, such as climate change, which have broad implications for agriculture and agri-food producers across the sector.

The federal government maintains a national network of world-class research centres and is committed to working collaboratively with farmers, provincial governments, academia, non-governmental organizations and other domestic and international stakeholders. Canada has a strong history and foundation in public agricultural research and continues to be an international leader in this field. The research and scientific demands of the sector are continuing to evolve and are increasingly relying on the use of new technologies and novel research approaches.

To support modern agricultural science in Canada, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $30 million over six years, starting in 2016–17, to Agriculture and Agri Food Canada to support advanced research in agricultural genomics. Investments in specialized scientific equipment and expertise will allow Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada to accelerate the DNA analysis and digital recording of the department’s collection of over 17 million physical specimens of insects, plants, fungi, bacteria and nematodes. This will improve public accessibility to this collection and will support research in priority areas, including climate change and the rapid identification and prevention of biological threats to agriculture.

Over the coming year, the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food will develop an approach for additional investments in agricultural science and research, informed by the review of federal support for fundamental science to be undertaken by the Minister of Science. This will allow for future investments in agricultural research to be well-positioned within Canada’s broader research ecosystem.

The Government is committed to ensuring federal laboratories and research centres across Canada have the infrastructure and equipment necessary to conduct cutting-edge scientific research. Canada’s world class agricultural and agri-food and plant and animal health research centres contribute to improving the safety and security of Canada’s food supply, help protect Canada’s plant and animal resource base, and assist in recruiting and training top scientists. Canada’s commitment to research in this area also promotes investment throughout Canada’s agriculture and agri-food supply chain and supports the competitiveness and sustainability of Canadian agriculture and agri food products.

As part of the federal infrastructure initiative, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $41.5 million, on a cash basis, starting in 2016–17, to support the rehabilitation and modernization of select Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and Canadian Food Inspection Agency research stations and laboratories in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario and Quebec. In addition to ensuring that these assets are in a good state of repair, this investment will facilitate advanced biological and environmental research through the procurement of state-of-the-art scientific equipment.

Supporting Business Growth and Innovation

For Canada to become a global innovation leader, more of the country’s creative entrepreneurs and innovative companies will need to seize global market opportunities to grow their businesses. Dynamic, globally connected firms will propel clean economic growth, increase Canada’s productivity and support well-paying jobs for the middle class. As the Government continues to develop its Innovation Agenda, Budget 2016 takes some interim actions to support innovative and growth-oriented businesses in reaching their potential and to help firms put innovation at the core of their business strategy.

Strengthening Innovation Networks and Clusters

Translating Canada’s science and technology strengths into successful, globally competitive companies requires the private sector, post-secondary institutions, governments and other stakeholders to work together more strategically to achieve greater impact. Connections between knowledge producers and users—including researchers and firms—and collaboration within supply chains driven by market opportunities create value through innovation and support economic growth. Information gaps and coordination challenges may prevent these linkages from being developed to their full potential, impacting the strength of innovation ecosystems. To help address these challenges, Budget 2016 proposes to make available up to $800 million over four years, starting in 2017–18, to support innovation networks and clusters as part of the Government’s upcoming Innovation Agenda.

This support will catalyze private sector dynamism, generate greater value from public investments in innovation and enable the pursuit of ambitious initiatives that bring a critical mass of stakeholders together and connect their ideas to the marketplace. Further details about the allocation of this funding will be provided in the coming months.

Helping High-Impact Firms Scale Up

The Government recognizes the vital role that high-impact firms play in creating jobs and generating economic growth. Having more firms realize their untapped growth potential supports a growing and innovative economy. However, these fast-growing firms tend to face common challenges at predictable points along their growth paths. By coordinating federal support such as financing solutions, advisory services and export and innovation support from key federal delivery organizations, these firms are better placed to invest in innovation and secure the talent and capital that will enable their success in the global marketplace.

Consistent with the Innovation Agenda’s goals to better coordinate and align support for Canadian innovators, Budget 2016 proposes to launch a new initiative in 2016–17 to help high-impact firms scale up and further their global competitiveness. Under this client-centric approach, firms will be able to access coordinated services tailored to their needs at crucial transition points, from key organizations starting with Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, the Business Development Bank of Canada, Export Development Canada, the National Research Council’s Industrial Research Assistance Program, Global Affairs Canada’s Trade Commissioner Service and the Regional Development Agencies. The initiative aims to target 1,000 firms in the first few years, and expand to more firms thereafter.

The new High-Impact Firm Initiative will help participating firms scale up and further their global competitiveness through coordinated services tailored to their needs. Below are some examples of the types of tailored support:

A well-established company based in Saskatchewan is in the process of developing revolutionary crop treatment technology. The company forecasts rapid growth once it commercializes its technology but has limited experience exporting outside of Canada and bringing new technologies to market. Through the new High-Impact Firm Initiative, the firm would further benefit from access to the Business Development Bank of Canada’s consulting services, the Trade Commissioner Service’s assistance in building business relationships in new markets, and Export Development Canada’s export insurance products. As a result, the company can establish a firm foundation for achieving high growth rates and more rapidly and efficiently bringing its technology to market.

An Ontario company that develops technology to instantaneously analyze manufacturing data approaches the National Research Council’s Industrial Research Assistance Program for assistance. The company has experienced exponential growth over the last five years but is now struggling with access to working capital. The High-Impact Firm Initiative connects the company with financing solutions offered by the Business Development Bank of Canada, which enables the company to access the working capital it needs. The time and effort saved enables the company to focus on what matters most: continuing to grow its business.

A company based in Halifax that specializes in up-and-coming wearable technologies is having difficulty raising new capital needed to sustain early production of its newest technology. Based on discussions with prospective customers, the company would further benefit from support from the National Research Council’s Industrial Research Assistance Program to bring its newest technology to market. Through sustained engagement with advisors under the new High-Impact Firm Initiative, the company would be able to access support from Export Development Canada and the Trade Commissioner Service at critical junctures in its export expansion plan, increasing its probability of success.

Supporting a Strong and Innovative Automotive Sector

The automotive industry is among Canada’s leading employers and exporters, valued at $17 billion per year and directly employing more than 125,000 Canadians from automotive assembly to parts production.

As the global automotive industry is evolving toward the production of cleaner, more connected vehicles, Canada has an opportunity to apply its strengths in areas such as lightweighting and information and communications technologies to designing and building the cars of the future. The Government of Canada partners with the Government of Ontario and the automotive industry to attract strategic, large-scale research and development projects focused on new vehicle technologies through the Automotive Innovation Fund. Budget 2016 announces the extension of the Automotive Innovation Fund, which is currently scheduled to sunset at the end of 2017–18, through to the end of 2020–21. In the coming months, the Minister of Innovation, Science and Economic Development will work, in collaboration with the Government of Ontario and industry stakeholders, to raise the profile of Canada’s strong capabilities and better influence investment location decisions necessary for the long-term competitiveness of the Canadian automotive sector. As part of this work, the Government will examine approaches that will allow it to maximize the impact of federal support offered to the automotive sector, including through assessing the terms of the Automotive Innovation Fund.

Developing a Canadian Cluster Map to Identify and Build on Regional Strengths

Clusters involve an extensive web of complementary linkages between companies and other actors, such as universities and colleges, research organizations and financing sources, in a specific industry sector and location. The presence of strong clusters can entail significant competitive benefits and growth opportunities for a region and the companies located there. Budget 2016 announces the Government’s intent to develop, in collaboration with provinces, territories, research institutions and other stakeholders, a nationwide Canadian Cluster Mapping portal. The availability of cluster mapping data—such as the composition of regional economic performance and patterns of business relationships—through a user-friendly, Internet-based tool will help to inform the design and delivery of programs by all levels of government. It will also enhance the ability of regions to attract foreign investment and help companies to benchmark and identify collaboration and sales opportunities.

Helping Small and Medium-Sized Companies to Innovate and Grow

The National Research Council’s Industrial Research Assistance Program supports innovative and growth-oriented small and medium-sized companies through advisory services, research and development project funding and networking. While further work to develop the Innovation Agenda takes place, Budget 2016 proposes to provide the Program with an additional $50 million in 2016–17 to increase the number of companies served by the Program’s highly qualified Industrial Technology Advisors nationwide. This funding complements the additional investments being proposed to support work experience for recent graduates through the Youth Employment Strategy (see “A Renewed Youth Employment Strategy” in Chapter 1).

Strengthening Canada’s Network of Accelerators and Incubators

Mentoring services, networking opportunities and business development advice provided by business accelerators and incubators can play a significant role in improving the growth prospects of young, technology-intensive firms. Consistent with the Government’s goals of defining outcomes and measures of success, Budget 2016 announces that the Government will work with stakeholders to develop a performance measurement framework for business accelerators and incubators in Canada. This framework will enable these organizations to benchmark their performance and drive improvement, help companies to choose their best options for support, and assist governments at all levels in increasing the effectiveness of public investments in this area.

Linking Canadian Technology Companies to Global Markets and Expertise

Increased access to global markets and expertise can help innovative Canadian technology firms grow. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $4 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to renew the Canadian Technology Accelerator Initiative. This program supports Canadian information and communications technology, life sciences and clean technology firms by providing mentorship, introductions to potential clients/partners, and desk space in business accelerators abroad. Managed by the Canadian Trade Commissioner Service, the program is available in nine locations in the United States, United Kingdom, France and India.

Supporting Business Innovation Through Optics and Photonics Solutions

The National Optics Institute, headquartered in Quebec City, is a private, non-profit organization that provides research and development support and technical assistance to businesses in the areas of optics and photonics. With applications as diverse as manufacturing, biomedicine, the life sciences, defence and aerospace, the Institute is helping Canadian companies to enhance their competitiveness and reach out to new markets. To support the Institute’s work with Canadian businesses, Budget 2016 proposes to provide it with $50 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, from Canada Economic Development for Quebec Regions.

The Government of Canada directly undertakes a variety of research, development and other scientific activities at laboratories and research facilities across the country, drawing from the expertise and support of some 35,000 federal scientists, technicians and other personnel. Strong federal science capabilities fulfill regulatory mandates in areas such as health, safety and the environment, and support innovation in industries including clean energy, information and communications technology, and transportation.

As part of the federal infrastructure initiative, investments will be made to modernize, green and increase the capabilities of federal science, research and innovation facilities. Funding that will support business innovation includes:

$87.2 million for Natural Resources Canada projects across the country that support research in forestry, mining and minerals, earth sciences and mapping, and innovation in energy technology. This investment will extend the useful life of aging laboratories and reduce the impact of antiquated work spaces on the delivery of Natural Resources Canada’s science priorities.

$8.7 million for Canadian Space Agency projects, including the rehabilitation of the anechoic chamber used at its Shirleys Bay, Ontario facility to simulate space conditions for the testing of large spacecraft and instruments. This investment will allow the Agency to continue to support technology development in Canada’s space sector through state-of-the-art assembly, integration and testing capabilities.

$18.5 million for National Research Council of Canada projects, including a leading-edge wave-making system at the St. John’s towing tank, which is used to evaluate the performance of marine technologies and vehicles. The investment will respond to industry needs in areas including shipbuilding, deep water mining, and search and rescue.

Marketing Canada as a Premier Tourism Destination

Canada’s tourism sector is an integral part of the economy, supporting over 627,000 jobs in rural areas, small towns and big cities in every region. Increasing awareness of Canada and promoting its spectacular destinations, attractions, events and festivals to an international audience supports growth in this sector. Canada’s national tourism marketing organization, Destination Canada, has a strong track record of working with industry partners to maximize the impact of marketing campaigns.

Budget 2016 builds on this successful model by proposing to provide $50 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to Destination Canada to seize opportunities with partners by augmenting marketing initiatives in important international markets, such as the United States and China.

Strengthening Northern Economic Development

A strong, diversified, sustainable and dynamic economy for Northerners, including Indigenous peoples, communities and businesses across Canada’s three territories, contributes to Canada’s prosperity. Since 2004, the Strategic Investments in Northern Economic Development program has been a key lever of federal economic development in the North. The program focuses on fostering growth and development in the North including in key sectors such as geosciences, renewable energy, fisheries, tourism and cultural sectors, supporting economic diversification and encouraging Northerners’ participation in the economy.

Budget 2016 continues this momentum. It proposes to provide $40 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to renew the Strategic Investments in Northern Economic Development program delivered by the Canadian Northern Economic Development Agency.

Mineral Exploration Tax Credit

The 15-per-cent Mineral Exploration Tax Credit helps junior mineral exploration companies raise capital by providing an incentive to individual investors in flow-through shares issued to finance “grassroots” mineral exploration. This credit is in addition to the deduction provided to the investor for the exploration expenses “flowed through” from the company that issues the shares. The credit is scheduled to expire on March 31, 2016. Given this challenging time for junior mining companies, the Government proposes to support their mineral exploration efforts by extending the credit for an additional year, until March 31, 2017. It is estimated that this measure will result in a net reduction in federal revenues of $20 million over the 2016–17 to 2017–18 period.

Expanding Trade Opportunities

An open trade and investment environment allows firms to thrive and provides better jobs for the middle class. The competitiveness of Canadian businesses in the international marketplace will be enhanced by breaking down barriers to trade, both internal and abroad, and providing the appropriate tools and policy framework that allow Canadians to take advantage of new trade opportunities.

The Government recently completed the final steps of the Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement. Canada and the European Commission are committed to swift ratification so that our citizens can quickly reap the benefits of this high-quality agreement. The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) would offer opportunities to grow Canadian trade with Asia-Pacific countries, enhance North American production and improve job quality in Canada. The Government continues to consult Canadians in an open and transparent manner on the merits of ratifying the TPP.

Going forward, the Government is also committed to deepening trade relationships with large emerging markets, including China and India.

Supporting Manufacturers Through Tariff Relief

Canadian manufacturers need a wide range of inputs to produce their high-quality products. Some of these manufacturing inputs are imported and may face tariffs when entering Canada. Such tariffs are a non-recoverable charge that increases the production costs of Canadian manufacturers, affecting their competitiveness at home and abroad. It has been a longstanding practice to eliminate such tariffs to support Canadian manufacturing.

Budget 2016 announces that the Government will eliminate tariffs on about a dozen manufacturing inputs, providing an estimated $9 million in tariff savings over the next five years to Canadian manufacturers in the consumer goods and transportation sectors.

Budget 2016 also announces the Government’s intention to launch public consultations on eliminating tariffs on food manufacturing ingredients other than supply-managed products. These ingredients are primarily used in the agri-food processing industry, Canada’s largest manufacturing employer and an important contributor to Canada’s economy. Eliminating tariffs on imported ingredients will support investment and job creation in this important sector by strengthening the competitiveness of Canadian agri-food processors in domestic and foreign markets.

Supporting Ferry Fleet Renewal

Ferry services are an integral part of Canada’s transportation network, annually carrying over 55 million passengers and 19 million vehicles in locations across the country. To support ferry operators’ plans to renew their aging fleet, Budget 2016 proposes to waive the 25 per cent tariff on ferries of all sizes imported after October 1, 2015. This will provide an estimated $118 million in duty savings over six years, allowing ferry operators, such as those from Newfoundland and Labrador, to reinvest the savings in their fleet renewal plans, enhance ferry services and reduce fares for passengers and commercial users.

Strengthening Canada’s Response to Unfair Trade

A modern and effective trade remedy system is an important part of the Government’s commitment to support Canadian jobs and investment. Fostering the conditions for manufacturing growth and new investment requires open markets both in Canada and abroad, as well as the ability to address unfairly traded goods entering the Canadian market. As part of Budget 2016, the Government is taking steps to improve its ability to effectively remedy dumped and subsidized imports, including through specific legislative amendments. Further, the Government will consult stakeholders to ensure that Canada’s trade remedy system offers Canadian businesses the ability to respond to changing global trade conditions.

The Government of Canada has been working with the State of Michigan and the U.S. Federal Government to construct a new international crossing between Windsor and Detroit since the early 2000s. A significant milestone towards the construction of the Gordie Howe International Bridge project was achieved on January 20, 2016, with the completion of the first phase of the procurement process and the announcement of three short-listed bidders for the project. In the coming months, the Request for Proposals will be launched to select a private sector partner for the construction and ongoing operation of the new crossing.

Investments such as the Gordie Howe International Bridge project will help stimulate the local, regional and national economies by creating jobs and opportunities for the middle class. The new crossing at the site of the most important international land crossing in North America will contribute to the economic growth and continued prosperity of both Canada and the United States.

1 Numbers may not add due to rounding.



<<< source: ch3-en.html >>>

Chapter 3 - A Better Future for  Indigenous Peoples

Introduction

Budget  2016 advances the Government’s objective to renew the relationship with  Indigenous peoples by making real progress on the issues most important to  Indigenous people. Too many generations of Indigenous peoples have suffered  from the neglect and failed policies of the federal government. There should be  no reason preventing an Indigenous child from having the same hopes and  aspirations as any other child in Canada or from having the opportunities to  achieve them. Economically, the arguments are sound. Indigenous peoples  represent the fastest-growing segment of the Canadian population and are an  important part of Canada’s economic prosperity. The unprecedented investments in  Indigenous peoples proposed in Budget 2016 will help us to turn the page and  begin a new chapter in the relationship between Canada and Indigenous peoples.  All Canadians will benefit as a result.

…no relationship is more important to me and to  Canada than the one with First Nations, the Métis Nation, and Inuit.

The relationship between Canada and  Indigenous peoples is vital. Yet First Nations, the Métis Nation, and  Inuit do not enjoy the same quality of life as other people in Canada. Intergenerational  poverty harms families and has costs for the Canadian economy. The Government  is committed to working in partnership with Indigenous peoples to break down  the barriers that have for too long held back individuals and communities from  reaching their full potential to contribute to and participate in Canada’s  prosperity. To support our shared economic interests and to advance the process  of reconciliation, this Government proposes an unprecedented level of  investment to support Indigenous communities and the aspirations of Indigenous  peoples. The proposed investments, including in on reserve education and  infrastructure, begin to address some of the root causes of poverty, promote  opportunity and inclusive growth, and help to lay the foundation for growth in  Indigenous communities. This will benefit the broader Canadian economy.

Budget 2016 proposes to invest $8.4 billion  over five years, beginning in 2016–17, to improve the socio-economic conditions of Indigenous peoples and  their communities and bring about transformational change. This represents a  significant increase over the investments that would have been made under the  Kelowna Accord. The unprecedented scale of this investment underscores the  Government’s intent to renew the relationship between Canada and Indigenous peoples.  The proposed investments in education, infrastructure, training and other  programs will directly contribute to a better quality of life for Indigenous  peoples and a stronger, more unified, and prosperous Canada.

National  Inquiry Into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls

Our government is committed to real and substantive reconciliation with  Indigenous Peoples in this country, and the inquiry is an important step on  this path to end the unacceptable rates of violence against Indigenous  women and girls.

The number of missing and murdered  Indigenous women and girls is a national tragedy. On December 8, 2015, the  Government announced its intention to launch a national inquiry into the  unacceptable overrepresentation of Indigenous women and girls as victims of  violence. Budget 2016 proposes to allocate $40 million over two years,  beginning in 2016–17, toward the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered  Indigenous Women and Girls.

Engaging  with Indigenous Peoples

Renewing the relationship with  Indigenous peoples will require that the Government do more to ensure that the  voices of Indigenous peoples are heard. Aboriginal Representative Organizations  have an important role to play in this regard and must be active partners as  the Government works to make progress on the issues most important to Indigenous  peoples. To support the capacity of Aboriginal Representative Organizations to  engage with the Government, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $96 million  over five years and $10 million ongoing. The proposed investment will help  to ensure that we can move forward in the true spirit of cooperation.

Improving Primary and Secondary Education  for First Nations Children

Investing in  Aboriginal education will not only benefit the Aboriginal population itself,  but will also benefit Canadian governments and, by extension, the entire Canadian population.

Improving the education outcomes of First  Nations children living on reserve is critical to improve their quality of life  and contribute to stronger communities. Currently, only 38 per cent of First  Nations peoples aged 18-24 living on reserve have completed high school,  compared to 87 per cent for non-Indigenous Canadians. While Budget 2014  announced funding of $1.25 billion over three years beginning in 2016–17  to support on reserve education, this funding was subsequently reduced in  Budget 2015 to $241 million over the same period. This Government has committed  to provide funding to make sure that every First Nations child receives a  quality education.

To address the critical need to improve  education outcomes, Budget 2016 proposes to make substantial investments in  primary and secondary education on reserve, totalling $2.6 billion over  five years starting in 2016–17, including the remaining funding previously  announced in Budget 2014 for this purpose (Table 3.1). This includes funding to  address immediate needs and to keep pace with cost growth over the medium term.  Budget 2016 also proposes to invest in language and cultural programming. This  programming recognizes the unique circumstances and needs of First Nations  children and will enrich the classroom experience. Budget 2016 also proposes  investments in literacy and numeracy programs and special needs education,  which will contribute to improved education outcomes.

In order to achieve meaningful gains in education outcomes for First  Nations, Budget 2016 proposes significant funding to support the transformation  of the current on reserve education system through a respectful process of  consultation and partnership with First Nations. In addition, the field of  education is constantly evolving and the impact of policies on education  outcomes should be closely measured and evaluated. Budget 2016 proposes funding  for this purpose and to apply the latest education innovations to the First  Nations context, including support for the Martin Aboriginal Education  Initiative, which has a proven track record of significantly raising the  literacy rate of First Nations children on reserve.

Ensuring Indigenous students have the same  opportunities for success as other Canadian students also means ensuring  Indigenous high school graduates can access post-secondary education. Many  currently face a range of barriers in doing so. The Government will work with  students, parents, educators and Indigenous groups to explore how to best  ensure that students wishing to pursue post-secondary studies have the  resources and supports they need to pursue their dreams and be full  participants in the new global economy.

Fostering  Better Learning Environments by Investing in First Nations Schools

The academic achievement of First Nations  children, as well as their health and well-being, depends in large part on the  quality of their schools. There is a significant need to repair and construct  schools on reserve and ensure that they are adequately maintained. Budget 2016  proposes to invest $969.4 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, in  First Nations education infrastructure on reserve.

Ensuring the Safety and Well-Being  of First Nations Children

The health and safety of First Nations  children is a key priority of the Government. The First Nations Child and  Family Services program supports First Nations’ child welfare agencies that  provide culturally appropriate services to ensure the safety and well-being of  First Nations children on reserve. To support both the immediate needs of First  Nations children and to begin a process of reform to strengthen the First  Nations Child and Family Services program, Budget 2016 proposes to invest $634.8 million  over five years, beginning in 2016–17. Program reforms will be developed in  partnership with First Nations stakeholders. The goal is to ensure that  programming emphasizes the prevention of harmful conditions for children rather  than interventions after harm has occurred, which typically involves separating  children from their families and communities. An improved approach will help  First Nations parents, many of whom have suffered the legacy of residential  schools, better access the supports they need to raise their children in safe and  healthy environments.

Aboriginal  Skills and Employment Training Strategy

The Aboriginal Skills and Employment  Training Strategy helps Indigenous peoples in all regions of the country to  develop employment skills and pursue training for lasting employment. There is  scope to enhance the training provided through this program in fields that  would enable First Nations peoples to directly support their community needs,  including in housing construction, water treatment, child care, and local  administration. Budget 2016 proposes to invest $15 million over two years,  beginning in 2016–17, to launch a pilot project to enhance training that aligns  with community needs.

The proposed investments in Budget 2016 are the first phase of a  renewed and expanded Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy. Over  the next year, the Government will consult with stakeholders, including  Indigenous organizations and employers, in order to work towards a renewed and  expanded Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy.

Investing in Social Infrastructure to  Create Inclusive Growth

Investing in social infrastructure in  Indigenous communities is a key pillar of the Government of Canada’s strategy  to create inclusive growth. Investments in social infrastructure can contribute  to improving the quality of life of Indigenous communities—by ensuring people have quality housing, improved access to early  learning and child care, better health, cultural and recreational  infrastructure. Over the next five years, the Government proposes to invest $1.2 billion  in support of social infrastructure in First Nations, Inuit and Northern  communities. The proposed investments are part of the first phase of the  Government’s 10-year plan to invest in social infrastructure and position  Canada for sustained long-term, inclusive growth. The second phase of this 10-year plan will include additional investments in social infrastructure for  Indigenous communities.

Improving  Housing in First Nations Communities

First Nations peoples living on reserve are  more likely to experience poor housing conditions and overcrowding than the  general population. To address urgent housing needs on reserve, Budget 2016  proposes to provide $554.3 million over two years beginning in 2016–17. Of  this amount, $416.6 million over two years would be provided to Indigenous  and Northern Affairs Canada to address immediate housing needs on reserve. An  additional $137.7 million over two years would be provided to Canada Mortgage  and Housing Corporation, most of which would support the renovation and  retrofit of existing housing on reserve.

The proposed investments are a first step.  The Government will be working with First Nations communities over the  coming year to develop an effective long-term approach to supporting the  construction and maintenance of an adequate supply of housing on reserve as  part of a broader National Housing Framework.

Supporting  Northern and Inuit Housing

The need for affordable housing is also  particularly high in the North and Inuit communities. To address urgent housing  needs in these regions, Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $177.7 million  over two years, starting in 2016–17, to provinces and territories through the  Investment in Affordable Housing initiative. Specifically, over two years,  $8 million would be provided to Yukon, $12 million to the Northwest  Territories and $76.7 million to Nunavut. Further, investments would also be  earmarked for three Inuit regions—Nunavik ($50 million over two years),  Nunatsiavut ($15 million over two years) and the Inuvialuit Settlement  Region ($15 million over two years).

Providing  Safe Shelter for Victims of Violence

No one fleeing domestic violence should be  left without a place to turn, including in First Nations communities.  Women and children fleeing violence need a safe place to live while they plan  their future and turn the page on violence. To support the renovation and  construction of new shelters for victims of family violence in First Nations  communities, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $10.4 million over  three years, starting in 2016–17.

Budget 2016 also proposes up to $33.6 million  over five years, beginning in 2016–17, and up to $8.3 million ongoing, in  additional funding to better support shelters serving victims of family violence  living in First Nations communities. This funding will also ensure the  necessary operating resources for the new shelters proposed for  First Nations communities under broader investments in social  infrastructure.

Supporting  Early Learning and Child Care

The Government recognizes that access to  affordable, quality child care that is culturally appropriate is critical  for Indigenous parents and children. Budget 2016 proposes to undertake  urgent repairs and renovations of the facilities used by the Aboriginal Head  Start On Reserve Program and the First Nations and Inuit Child Care Initiative through  a proposed investment of $29.4 million in 2016–17.

In addition, Budget 2016 proposes to  provide $100 million in 2017–18 towards Early Learning and Child Care on  reserve. The Government will be  engaging with Indigenous organizations and parents to determine the best  approach to delivering high quality early learning and child care on reserve as  part of a new National Framework on Early Learning and Child Care. The proposed  investments will complement the significant investments the Government is  proposing to make in First Nations K-12 education.

Investing in Cultural and Recreational  Infrastructure

In First Nations communities, cultural and  recreational infrastructure can provide an important focal point for community  activities. To support the construction of cultural and recreational  infrastructure on reserve, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $76.9 million over two  years, beginning in 2016–17.

Improving  Community Health Care Facilities on Reserve

Health infrastructure on reserve is aging  and in some cases is insufficient to meet growing community needs. To address  critically needed health infrastructure for First Nations communities, Budget  2016 proposes to invest $270 million over five years. This funding will support  the construction, renovation and repair of nursing stations, residences for  health care workers, and health offices that provide health information on  reserve.

Investing  in Green Infrastructure on Reserve

Green infrastructure investments on reserve  can help protect the environment, and the health and safety of communities.  They can also create jobs. Over the next five years, the Government proposes to  improve on reserve water and wastewater infrastructure and waste management by  providing $2.24 billion to First Nations communities to support such  improvements. The proposed investments form part of the first phase of the  Government’s 10-year plan to invest in green infrastructure. The second phase  of this plan will include additional investments in green infrastructure in  Indigenous communities.

Monitoring  of Water on Reserve

Ensuring that water is safe for consumption  requires that it be regularly tested and monitored by trained water system  operators and licensed laboratories. To improve the monitoring and testing of on  reserve community drinking water, Budget 2016 proposes to invest $141.7 million  over five years, starting in 2016–17. This will complement the significant investments that the Government  is proposing to make in water and wastewater infrastructure on reserve through  the green infrastructure initiative. The proposed investment will also help to  monitor progress towards ending boil water advisories on reserve.

Strengthening  on Reserve Water and Wastewater Infrastructure

In 2011, a National Assessment of First  Nations Water and Wastewater Infrastructure identified the need for additional  investments in this type of infrastructure as well as the challenges Indigenous  communities faced to adequately maintain and operate their facilities. While  some progress has been made, significant gaps remain. Budget 2016 proposes to  address health and safety needs, ensure proper facility operation and  maintenance, and end long-term boil water advisories on reserves within five  years by investing an additional $1.8 billion over five years, starting in  2016–17.

Addressing  Waste Management for First Nations Communities

Many First Nations communities face  challenges in adequately managing garbage and waste on reserve, which can  contaminate the environment and pose health and safety risks to people. Budget  2016 proposes to support efforts to improve how garbage and waste is managed on  reserve through a proposed investment of $409 million over five years, starting  in 2016–17. The proposed funding will help First Nations located near  municipalities to divert waste from reserve lands to municipal facilities and  reduce the amount of garbage going to landfills through recycling and  composting programs.

For remote First Nations communities, the  investments will support the construction of properly engineered landfills and  ensure that waste disposal meets environmental standards, limiting potential  environmental and health impacts that come from poor waste management.

Investing  in Community Infrastructure

To complement the social and green investments  being proposed on reserve, Budget 2016 also proposes to provide an  additional $255 million over two years starting in 2016–17 to the First  Nations Infrastructure Fund to support investments in a range of complementary  infrastructure such as roads and bridges, energy systems, broadband  connectivity, physical infrastructure to mitigate the effects of natural  disasters and fire protection services. These investments will help communities  as they develop and grow.

Métis  Nation Economic Development Strategy

Close to 32 per cent of Indigenous peoples  in Canada self-identify as Métis peoples. The Métis Nation represents important  Métis communities in Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and British  Columbia. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $25 million over five years,  beginning in 2016–17, to support economic development for the Métis Nation.

Renewing  the Urban Aboriginal Strategy

Many Indigenous peoples  move to urban centres to pursue new opportunities, but many face challenges  that are distinct to urban Indigenous peoples. The $51-million-per-year Urban  Aboriginal Strategy seeks to connect Indigenous peoples in urban centres to  services and programs that are tailored for their particular needs. However,  $23.7 million of the program’s funding is set to expire at the end of the  2015–16 fiscal year. Budget 2016 proposes to renew this funding for 2016–17. Over  the course of the next year, the Government will work to identify ways to  strengthen the program to more effectively meet the needs of urban Indigenous  peoples.

Assisting  Indigenous Peoples Facing the Criminal Justice System

Indigenous peoples are overrepresented in  the justice system and face challenges that can impact their access to fair  judicial proceedings. Budget 2016 proposes to provide an additional  $4 million per year for the Aboriginal Courtwork Program. The program  assists Indigenous peoples moving through the criminal justice system to better  understand their rights and the nature of the charges against them. It also  helps those involved in administering the criminal justice system to overcome  language and cultural barriers when dealing with Indigenous peoples and to  better appreciate the socio-economic circumstances that they face.

Aboriginal Languages Initiative

For many Indigenous peoples, language  is an expression of nationhood and identity—a way to transmit values, beliefs  and histories from generation to generation. The Aboriginal Languages  Initiative invests $5 million per year to promote, preserve, and enhance  Indigenous languages. Budget 2016 proposes to extend funding for the  initiative to 2016–17. The Government will work with Indigenous groups to  consider how to best support Indigenous language and culture beyond 2016–17.

Support  for the First Nations Finance Authority

The First Nations Finance Authority allows  qualifying First Nations to work collectively to issue bonds and raise  long-term private capital for infrastructure and economic development projects  in their communities. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $20 million over two  years, beginning in 2016–17, to strengthen the Authority’s capital base. This  will help the Authority continue to secure the best possible credit rating for  the benefit of its borrowing members, allowing participating First Nations to  continue to access long-term financing at preferred rates.

Supporting  First Nations Fishing Enterprises

The Atlantic and Pacific Integrated  Commercial Fisheries Initiatives are designed around effective co-management  approaches with First Nations and other fisheries participants. They seek to  integrate First Nations fishing enterprises into existing commercial fisheries  to provide economic opportunities for First Nations fishers and to improve the  overall management of fisheries on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide  $33.1 million in 2016–17 to Fisheries and Oceans Canada to extend the  Atlantic and Pacific Integrated Commercial Fisheries Initiatives. These  measures will ensure that First Nations can access commercial fisheries and build sustainable  commercial fishing enterprises.

The  Government has committed to lift the 2-per-cent funding cap for First Nations  programs and work to establish a new fiscal relationship that gives First  Nations communities sufficient, predictable and sustained funding.

The  2-per-cent funding cap on programs delivered by Indigenous and Northern Affairs  Canada was put in place in the late 1990s at a time of significant fiscal  restraint and was intended to provide sustainable growth in program funding to  support Indigenous peoples.

Budget  2016 proposes an unprecedented investment in programs for Indigenous peoples,  including in primary and secondary education, child and family services, and on  reserve infrastructure. By 2020–21,  total funding for Indigenous programs will be 22 per cent above the level of  funding that would have been provided under the previous 2-per-cent funding  cap. The proposed investments are expected to meet program funding  requirements over the next five years. To determine a new long-term fiscal  relationship, the Government will engage in consultations with First Nations  over the coming year.



<<< source: ch4-en.html >>>

Chapter 4 - A Clean Growth Economy

Introduction

Protecting the environment and growing the economy go hand in hand. Countries around the world are looking for new ways to expand and green their economies and create opportunities for their citizens. The global clean technology market is growing rapidly, presenting Canadian businesses with an immense opportunity to showcase their ingenuity and support sustainable prosperity for all Canadians.

At the recent United Nations Climate Conference (COP21) in Paris, alongside 194 other participating countries, Canada agreed to take steps to support the transition to a global low-carbon economy by limiting the global temperature increase to less than 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. The Government also announced its participation in Mission Innovation, a public-private initiative to dramatically increase global investments in clean energy. Acting on these commitments, in partnership with provinces and territories, the Government is now developing a pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change. Pricing carbon emissions will drive Canada's transition to a stronger, more resilient, low-carbon economy and help Canada address the global climate change challenge.

Supporting a clean economy will help position Canada to take  advantage of opportunities in the new global economy by diversifying the  economy and opening up access to new markets, while reducing emissions and  generating well-paying jobs for Canadians. The investments made in Budget 2016  are just the start and additional actions will be coming.

Investing In Clean  Technology

Clean technologies  are a key component of the Government's approach to promoting sustainable  economic growth and will play a critical role in Canada's transformation into a  low-carbon economy. The global clean technology market presents a promising  opportunity for Canadian businesses, a source of new clean jobs for the middle  class and a driver of prosperity for all Canadians.

As a first step, Budget 2016 proposes to provide early  strategic funding for clean technology projects to take advantage of this  growth opportunity and enhance environmental performance, which are outlined in  the following sections.

To support future investments, Budget 2016 proposes to  provide over
        $1 billion over four years, starting in 2017–18, to support clean technology,  including in the forestry, fisheries, mining, energy and agriculture sectors.  Further details about the allocation of this funding will be provided in the  coming months as part of the implementation of the Government's  Innovation Agenda.

Accelerating  Clean Technology Development

Investing in the  research, development and demonstration of new clean technologies accelerates  the innovation required to bring these technologies closer to  commercialization. This will help meet climate change objectives, increase the  productivity and competitiveness of Canadian firms, and create clean jobs.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide over $130 million over five  years, starting in 2016–17, to support clean technology research, development  and demonstration activities:

$50  million over four years, starting in 2017–18, to Sustainable Development  Technology Canada (SDTC) for the SD Tech Fund. These resources will enable SDTC  to announce new clean technology projects in 2016 that support the development  and demonstration of new technologies that address climate change, air quality,  clean water, and clean soil.

$82.5  million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to Natural Resources Canada to  support research, development and demonstration of clean energy technologies.  These resources will accelerate the innovation required to bring clean energy  technologies closer to commercialization, reducing the environmental impacts of  energy production and creating clean jobs.

Sustainable    Development Technology Canada (SDTC) was established in 2001 and supports the    development of a broad range of technologies to increase productivity,    efficiency and the competitiveness of Canadian industry and help contribute    to a cleaner environment. The SD Tech Fund is the flagship program operated    by SDTC. Clean technology companies that have benefitted from SDTC's support    include:

Sigma Devtech Inc. ( Quebec) —Biodegradable plastic is often identified as a solution to address    the mountains of plastic that end up in landfills, but it is currently    produced in small quantities and at a high price. Sigma Devtech intends to    overcome these problems using technology that produces a type of bioplastic    from pulp mill waste. SDTC is providing $3.1 million to this project.

Cellufuel Inc. ( Nova Scotia) —A biofuel that is chemically    indistinguishable from petroleum-based fuel and compatible with existing fuel    infrastructure and engines has been difficult to produce. Cellufuel's    technology converts wood into renewable diesel that meets the quality of    petroleum diesel. SDTC is providing $2.2 million to this project.

Comet Biorefining Inc. ( Ontario) —Bio-based products can potentially replace petro-based products in a    range of industries, improving sustainability through the reduction of greenhouse    gas emissions. Comet Biorefining's proprietary technology converts non-food    biomass, such as agricultural and forest material, into high-purity dextrose    sugar. The sugar can be transformed into a range of renewable chemicals and    biomaterials, and by-products from the process can be used for animal    nutrition and performance chemicals. SDTC is providing $10.9    million for this project.

Investing in  Electric Vehicle and Alternative Transportation Fuels Infrastructure

Early action is needed to  support the transition to low-carbon transportation fuels, as vehicle choices  made today will determine the mix of technologies on the road in 2030. Budget  2016 proposes to provide $62.5 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to  Natural Resources Canada to support the deployment of infrastructure for  alternative transportation fuels, including charging infrastructure for  electric vehicles and natural gas and hydrogen refuelling stations. The  Government will advance these objectives by working with provinces and  territories, municipalities and the private sector. These resources will also  support technology demonstration projects that advance electric vehicle  charging technology.

Expanding Tax  Support for Clean Energy

The income tax system encourages businesses to invest in  clean energy generation and energy efficiency equipment by providing  accelerated capital cost allowance (CCA) rates. CCA Classes 43.1 and 43.2  include a variety of equipment that generates energy by using renewable energy  sources or fuels from waste, or conserves energy by using fuel more  efficiently. Budget 2016 proposes to expand eligibility for accelerated CCA in  two important emerging areas: electric vehicle charging and electrical  energy storage.

First, the incentive will be extended to include electric  car charging stations, with the most generous treatment provided to chargers  that provide enough power for long-distance travel. Electric vehicles and  stationary renewable energy generation are complementary technologies;  providing an incentive for both helps to maximize the potential environmental  benefits of renewable energy generation.

Second, the range of stationary electrical energy storage  equipment eligible under CCA Classes 43.1 and 43.2 will be clarified and  expanded to explicitly allow a much broader range of equipment ancillary to  eligible generation equipment. In addition, stand-alone electrical energy  storage property will be included in Class 43.1 when the round trip  efficiency of the energy storage is greater than 50 per cent. Electrical  energy storage helps displace fossil-fuelled power generation and facilitate  the integration of a higher proportion of intermittent renewable electricity  generation into the electrical grid.

The deferral of tax associated with these measures is  expected to reduce federal revenues by $19 million over the 2016–17 to 2020–21  period.

Investing in  World-Leading Researchers in Clean and Sustainable Technology

Research is the starting point for new technologies and  approaches that will help Canada to become a low-carbon economy.

The Canada  Excellence Research Chairs Program strengthens Canada's ability to attract and  retain world-leading researchers in areas of strategic importance to Canada.  Canadian universities receive up to $10 million over seven years for each  Chair hosted at their institution.

Budget  2016 proposes to provide $20 million over eight years, starting in
        2018–19, to create two additional Canada Excellence Research Chairs in fields  related to clean and sustainable technology. These Chairs will be selected, in  addition to the anticipated 20 new Chairs, as part of the upcoming competition  to be launched in the spring of 2016.

Through the    Canada Excellence Research Chairs Program, the Government of Canada is    supporting world-leading researchers and their teams in clean technology    fields, helping to position Canadians to seize opportunities in global    markets while protecting the environment.

Dr. Steven L. Bryant, Canada Excellence    Research Chair in Materials Engineering for Unconventional Oil Reservoirs at    the University of Calgary, is working to bridge the gap between the current    technological status of the oil sands industry and where it needs to be to    ensure a sustainable, globally competitive future. Dr. Bryant's team is    combining nanotechnology and materials science research with chemical and    petroleum engineering, geoscience and chemistry to reduce the process    footprint for current extraction platforms, and develop new platforms that minimize    environmental impact and maximize productivity—helping to accelerate the    industry's transformation.

Dr. Ali Emadi, the Canada Excellence Research    Chair in Hybrid Powertrain at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, is    advancing Canada's automotive research leadership in the critical area of    electric powertrain technology. This work is helping to transform    transportation through plug-in hybrid and electric vehicles, responding    to the needs of a growing population of energy-conscious consumers in Canada and across the    globe.

Dr.    Robin Rogers, Canada Excellence Research Chair in Green Chemistry and Green    Chemicals at McGill University in Montral, Quebec,    is spearheading efforts to redesign chemicals, materials and manufacturing    technologies to prevent pollution and save energy, and in so doing create new    business opportunities. For example, his research on biologically active    ionic liquids for the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries is contributing    to increased efficacy, new treatment options and a reduced    environmental burden.

Increasing  Federal Support for Clean Technology Activities in All Regions

Canada's six  Regional Development Agencies support economic and community development by  leveraging local networks and capabilities. The Agencies' combined support  to clean technology activities amounted to $50 million in 2015–16. Budget  2016 announces that the Regional Development Agencies will double their annual aggregate  support for clean technology to $100 million per year, from existing resources,  starting in 2016–17.

Green bonds are a way to finance projects that    support important environmental objectives. They are also a way for investors    to know that their money will be used in an environmentally sound manner. In    December 2015, Export Development Canada (EDC), a federal Crown corporation,    issued a green bond of US$300 million. This builds on its successful Green    Bond Framework and previous US$300 million issue in 2014. These proceeds are    being used to support eligible transactions in the following categories:    renewable energy, industrial process improvements, recycling and recovery,    biofuels and bioenergy, waste and water management, alternative energy and    public ground transportation. EDC is committed to becoming a regular issuer    in the green bond market.

Advancing  Regional Electricity Cooperation

Significant investment in Canada's electricity sector will  be needed over the next 20 years to replace aging infrastructure and meet  growing demand for electricity. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $2.5 million  over two years, starting in 2016–17, to Natural Resources Canada to facilitate  regional dialogues and studies that identify the most promising electricity  infrastructure projects with the potential to achieve significant greenhouse  gas reductions. This initiative will help shape future investments to maximize  economic and environmental benefits.

Developing  Cleaner Oil and Gas Technologies

Developing Canada's hydrocarbon resources in cleaner, more sustainable ways will  be critical to enable the sector's continuing contributions to Canadian prosperity.

Budget 2016  proposes to provide $50 million over two years, starting in
        2016–17, to Natural Resources Canada to invest in technologies that will reduce  greenhouse gas emissions from the oil and gas sector.

Improving  Data on the Clean Technology Sector

Comprehensive,  regularly published data on Canada's clean technology sector will support  efforts to monitor the contributions this sector is already making to the  Canadian economy.

Budget 2016  proposes to provide $2.1 million over two years, starting in
        2016–17, to Natural Resources Canada to enhance clean technology data, in collaboration  with Statistics Canada and Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada.  This funding will result in a statistical  framework that provides regularly published information on the clean technology  sector's economic contributions to the Canadian economy and help the  Government track progress towards clean technology objectives.

Securing a  Cleaner, More Sustainable Environment

Protecting the  environment and growing the economy are not incompatible goals. A clean  environment and a strong economy go hand-in-hand. The Government is committed  to leaving future generations of Canadians a sustainable and prosperous  country. To this end, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $3.4 billion over five  years, starting in 2016–17, to address climate change and air pollution,  protect ecologically sensitive areas and restore public trust in the  environmental assessment processes.

Addressing  Climate Change and Air Pollution

The Government has committed to provide leadership as Canada  works towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improve air quality. There  is recognition that a collaborative approach between provincial, territorial  and federal governments is important to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and  enable sustainable economic growth. Canada is moving towards a pan-Canadian Framework  on Clean Growth and Climate Change that will meet or exceed Canada's  international greenhouse gas emissions targets. Pricing carbon will be a key  element to transition Canada to a stronger, more resilient low-carbon economy  while also improving our quality of life.

At the First Ministers' Meeting on March 3, 2016, the  Government, along with provincial and territorial partners, agreed to work  together to create the Vancouver Declaration on Clean Growth and Climate  Change. The Declaration is the first step in developing a concrete plan to  achieve Canada's international commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions  and build on the momentum of the United Nations Paris Agreement.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide almost $2.9 billion  over five years, starting in 2016–17, to address climate change and air  pollution issues. This funding will:

Support  the development of the pan-Canadian Framework, including a Low Carbon Economy Fund;

Help  ensure that Canada meets its international obligations;

Take  action to reduce emissions from Canada's  largest sources—transportation  and energy;

Advance  science and programming activities to better understand and adapt to the changing climate; and

Enable  evidence-based decisions to address air pollution.

Supporting  the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change

In the context of the pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth  and Climate Change, the Government has committed to create a Low Carbon Economy  Fund. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $2 billion over two years, starting in  2017–18, to establish the Low Carbon Economy Fund. The Fund will support  provincial and territorial actions that materially reduce greenhouse gas  emissions and are incremental to current plans, and achieve significant  reductions within the period of Canada's nationally determined target.  Resources will be allocated towards those projects that yield the greatest  absolute greenhouse gas reductions for the lowest cost per tonne.

Budget 2016 also proposes to provide $109.1 million over  five years, starting in 2016–17, to Environment and Climate Change Canada to  continue to advance the Government's domestic climate change objectives. The  resources will be used to undertake actions in four interconnected areas:  science, data reporting, policy and regulations. Sustained action on climate  change, framed by sound science and driven by transparent reporting of results  and ambitious policy and regulatory measures, will support the transition  to a low-carbon economy in Canada.

Moving to a  Cleaner Transportation Sector

The  transportation sector represented 23 per cent of Canada's greenhouse gas emissions in 2013,  and is the second largest source of emissions in Canada. It is also a  significant source of air pollution.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $56.9 million over two  years, starting in 2016–17, to Transport Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada to  support the transition to a cleaner transportation sector, including through  the development of regulations and standards for clean transportation  technology. Funding will also support Canada's continued participation in the  development of international emissions standards for emissions from the  international aviation, marine and rail sectors, including through the  International Maritime Organization and the International Civil Aviation  Organization.

Supporting  Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Development

Energy efficiency and clean energy policies increase the  uptake of clean technologies, reduce the environmental impact of energy use and  can provide cost savings for Canadians. These measures are essential for the  transition to a low-carbon economy. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $128.8  million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to Natural Resources Canada  to deliver energy efficiency policies and programs, and maintain clean energy  policy capacity. These resources will support improved energy efficiency  standards and codes for products, buildings, industry and vehicles, and further  the development of a legislative framework for offshore renewable  energy projects.

Budget 2016 also proposes to provide $10.7 million over two  years, starting in 2016–17, to Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada to  implement renewable energy projects in off-grid Indigenous and northern  communities that rely on diesel and other fossil fuels to generate heat and  power. First Nations will also benefit from proposed new funding for the First  Nations Infrastructure Fund (see Chapter 3—A Better Future for Indigenous  Peoples), which will support a range of community infrastructure investments,  including energy systems.

Adapting to Climate Change Impacts

Canada will also need to adapt our public infrastructure  to a changing climate and strengthen the resilience of our communities to the  impacts of climate change. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $129.5 million over  five years, starting in
        2016–17, to seven federal departments and agencies to implement programming  focused on building the science base to inform decision-making, protecting the  health and well-being of Canadians, building resilience in the North and  Indigenous communities, and enhancing competitiveness in key economic sectors.

Budget 2016 also proposes to provide an additional  $40.0 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to integrate climate  resilience into building design guides and codes. The funding will support  revised national building codes by 2020 for residential, institutional,  commercial and industrial facilities. Guides integrating climate resiliency  into the design and rehabilitation of public infrastructure will also be ready  for adoption by 2020.

Ensuring  International Environmental Cooperation

Climate change and air pollution are international issues  that require international cooperation to find solutions. Budget 2016 proposes  to provide $61.3 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to Environment  and Climate Change Canada, Natural Resources Canada and Global Affairs Canada  to continue international environmental engagement to advance Canada's climate  change and air pollution objectives. This funding will ensure Canada continues  to play a leadership role in international environmental organizations, such as  the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and will allow  Canada to work toward a North American clean energy and environmental agreement  with the United States and Mexico.

Canada is    committed to ambitious action on climate change. On November 27, 2015, the    Government announced that Canada will contribute an historic total of $2.65    billion on a cash basis by 2020 to help the poorest and most vulnerable    countries mitigate and adapt to the adverse effects of climate change.    Canada's climate finance contribution, scaling up to $800 million per    year on a cash basis by 2020–21, is a substantial increase from historical    levels of support and represents a doubling of Canada's fast-start financing    levels.

Canada's climate    finance contribution will be delivered through a variety of channels and    instruments for critical efforts, such as helping developing countries adapt    to climate change, deploying renewable energy technologies and managing risks    related to severe weather events. This contribution will support the    commitment Canada made under the 2009 Copenhagen Accord to work with partners    to jointly mobilize, from a wide variety of sources, US$100 billion annually    by 2020.

Reducing Air Pollution

Air pollution harms the environment and the  health of Canadians, and gives rise to economic costs. While progress is being  made to address air emissions from domestic sources (i.e., industry and  vehicles) and from transboundary sources, air pollution remains a concern.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $345.3  million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to Environment and Climate Change  Canada, Health Canada and the National Research Council to take action to  address air pollution in Canada. The funding will allow these organizations to  conduct research on and monitor air pollution sources as well as health and  environmental impacts; report to Canadians on air pollution sources and on  local, regional and national air quality; continue to implement the Air Quality  Management System jointly with provinces and territories; administer and  enforce existing regulatory and non-regulatory instruments to reduce air  pollution; and maintain the economic and policy capacity to develop new policy  approaches and regulatory instruments to improve air quality.

These efforts will be complemented through  advances in Canadian clean technology, providing air pollution reduction  solutions alongside economic opportunities, and contributing to sustainable,  inclusive prosperity for Canadians.

Tax Treatment  of Emission Allowance Regimes

Several  provinces have introduced or are in the course of introducing emissions trading  regimes. Budget 2016 proposes specific income tax rules to clarify the income  tax treatment of emission allowances and ensure the appropriate tax treatment  of transactions under these regimes.

Protecting  and Restoring Canada's Ecosystems and Natural Heritage

Canada's national parks, national marine conservation areas  and marine protected areas provide outstanding examples of our country's  natural landscapes, generate economic activity by attracting visitors from  Canada and abroad, and provide Canadians with access to our natural heritage.

From coast to coast  to coast, Canada has unparalleled ocean and freshwater resources. Actions to  protect water quality and ecosystem health are critical to the lives and  livelihoods of all Canadians.

Budget  2016 proposes a number of measures to support the further enhancement and  expansion of protected areas; to improve evidence-based decision-making through  increased funding for ocean and freshwater science; to protect the quality of  water in Canada's lakes and oceans; and to reduce risks to human health and the  environment by taking action on federal contaminated sites.

Providing  Free Access and Expanding the National Park System

Canada's national parks belong to all Canadians. The Parks  Canada Agency is responsible for protecting and presenting nationally  significant examples of Canada's natural and cultural heritage. Through its  broad network of national parks, marine conservation areas and national  historic sites, Parks Canada connects Canadians with their heritage.

The Government is committed to expanding the national parks  and national marine conservation areas systems to ensure each of Canada's  distinct natural regions is protected. It is also committed to developing and  expanding programs and services so that more Canadians can experience our  national parks and learn about our environment and historic sites.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $142.3 million over  five years, starting in 2016–17, to the Parks Canada Agency and  Natural Resources Canada to deliver on these commitments:

$42.4 million over five years, starting in  2016–17, to continue work on developing new national parks and national marine  conservation areas, including the Lancaster Sound National Marine Conservation  Area, Nunavut and Thaidene Nene National Park, Northwest Territories;

Up to $83.3  million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to provide free admission for all  visitors to national parks, national marine conservation areas and national  historic sites operated by the Agency in 2017, the 150th anniversary  of Confederation, and to provide free admission for all children under 18 years  of age, beginning in 2018; and

$16.6 million over five years, starting in  2016–17, to expand the Learn to Camp program, develop new programming to tell  Canada's stories, and encourage Indigenous story-telling and eco-tourism  opportunities.

Canada's    national parks belong to all Canadians. The Government is committed to    preserving and expanding our national parks, national marine conservation    areas and historic sites and to making them more accessible to Canadians. To achieve this, Budget 2016 provides significant new investments,    including:

$42.4 million to the Parks Canada Agency and    Natural Resources Canada to continue work on developing new national parks    and national marine conservation areas, including the Lancaster Sound    National Marine Conservation Area, Nunavut and Thaidene Nene National Park,    Northwest Territories;

Up to $83.3 million to the Parks Canada    Agency to provide free admission for all visitors to national parks, national    marine conservation areas and national historic sites operated by the Agency    in 2017, the 150th anniversary of Confederation, and to provide free    admission for all children under 18 years of age, beginning in 2018; and

$16.6 million to the Parks Canada Agency to    expand the Learn to Camp program, develop new programming to tell Canada's    stories, and encourage Indigenous story-telling and eco-tourism    opportunities.

As part of the    federal infrastructure initiative in Chapter 2—Growth for the Middle Class,    Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $191 million over two years,    starting in 2016–17 on a cash basis, to the Parks Canada Agency to improve    tourism and highway assets, including:

$85.9 million to twin part of the    Trans-Canada Highway through Yoho National Park in British Columbia;

$21.6 million to pave highways through Wood    Buffalo National Park in the Northwest Territories;

$65.9 million for a new biking and walking    trail in Jasper National Park in Alberta; and

$17.7    million to build a new biking and walking trail in Pacific Rim National Park    Reserve in British Columbia.

Protecting  Marine and Coastal Areas

Canada is a  signatory to the International Convention on Biological Diversity. In 2010,  members of the convention adopted the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, which  included a target to conserve 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas by 2020.  To achieve this, Canada needs to conserve an additional 525,000 km2,  an area roughly equivalent to the size of all of the Atlantic provinces.

In Canada, marine  and coastal areas are protected through a variety of measures, including the  designation of Marine Protected Areas under the Oceans Act , National Marine Conservation Areas and National  Wildlife Areas. Approximately 1 per cent of Canada's marine and coastal areas  have already been protected.

Budget  2016 proposes to provide $81.3 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to  Fisheries and Oceans Canada and Natural Resources Canada to support marine  conservation activities, including the designation of new Marine Protected  Areas under the Oceans Act . Parks  Canada will also continue efforts to develop new National Marine Conservation  Areas. Together these actions are designed to achieve the target to protect 10  per cent of Canada's marine and coastal areas by 2020.

Investing in  Ocean and Freshwater Research

Oceans and waterways are vital to Canada's economy. They  connect us with global markets and are a resource for coastal and Indigenous  communities. Scientific evidence is the foundation on which the Government  develops policies around the management and protection of the oceans, coasts,  waterways and fisheries to ensure that they are healthy, sustainable and  profitable for future generations.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $197.1 million over five  years, starting in 2016–17, to Fisheries and Oceans Canada to increase ocean  and freshwater science, monitoring and research activities and to provide  support for the Experimental Lakes Area in Northwestern Ontario. Funding will  support new and expanded research activities that will promote the health of  fish stocks and sustainable aquaculture, enable more comprehensive monitoring  of the impacts of aquatic pollution, and enhance our knowledge of freshwater  ecosystems.

Improving  Great Lakes Water Quality and Ecosystem Health

Millions of  Canadians live and work along the shores of the Great Lakes. Protecting water  quality and ecosystem health in the Great Lakes is vital to ensuring that  Canadians can continue to depend on this rich ecosystem for their drinking  water, for recreation and for jobs.

To date, phosphorus levels in Lake  Erie have been measured and reduction targets have been established. To help  preserve the Great Lakes as a valuable resource, Budget 2016 proposes to  provide $3.1 million in 2016–17 to Environment and Climate Change Canada to continue to improve  nearshore water and ecosystem health by reducing phosphorus and the resulting  algae in Lake Erie. With these resources, the focus will shift from setting  phosphorus targets to achieving them, including developing a domestic action  plan, and monitoring and reporting on progress. Lessons learned from phosphorus  reduction in Lake Erie could be applied to the other Great Lakes.

Managing Transboundary Water Issues

Canada and the United States share 20 per cent of the  world's freshwater in the Great Lakes alone, and jointly manage countless other  lakes and rivers. The International Joint Commission is the  binational body that manages these Canada-U.S. transboundary waters. These  waters are of great economic, environmental and symbolic value to Canadians,  and how we manage them is of utmost importance. In recent years, flooding,  variable water levels and water quality have affected four important water  basins that straddle the Canada-U.S. border—the Upper Great Lakes, Lake  Champlain and the Richelieu River, Lake of the Woods and the Souris River.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $19.5 million over  five years, starting in 2016–17, to the International Joint Commission to  enable Canada to match U.S. funding to study these issues in order to protect  the local environment and communities.

Addressing the  Threat of Pollutants From the Manolis  L

The Manolis L ,  which sank to a depth of more than 80 metres in 1985 off the coast of  Newfoundland and Labrador, lay dormant until April 2013 when cracks in the  hull, coupled with a powerful storm, allowed some fuel oil to reach the  surface. Since then, the Canadian Coast Guard has installed an oil containment system.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $6 million in 2016–17 to the  Canadian Coast Guard for a technical assessment of the wreck, a critical next  step in developing a permanent solution to addressing the threat of pollution  from the vessel.

Federal contaminated sites are a legacy of    past practices that have resulted in contamination. These sites pose    environmental and human health risks to Canadians and the environment. As    part of the federal infrastructure initiative in Chapter 2—Growth for the    Middle Class, Budget 2016 proposes to provide over $200 million over two    years, starting in 2016–17 on a cash basis, to accelerate the assessment and    remediation of contaminated sites for which the Government is responsible.    This funding will identify and reduce the risks to human health and the    environment from federal contaminated sites.

Strengthening  Canada's Environmental Assessment Processes

Robust environmental assessment processes support evidence-based  decision-making for major projects. Canadians look to the Government to ensure  that these processes take full account of the environmental, social and  economic considerations surrounding new projects. Budget 2016 proposes measures  to rebuild trust in Canada's environmental assessment processes, provide the  Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency with the necessary resources to  deliver on its responsibilities, and increase and sustain capacity for  evidence-based decision-making for projects in the North.

Restoring  Trust in Environmental Assessment

In the  Speech from the Throne, the Government committed  to review federal environmental assessment processes as part of efforts  to restore public trust and support  the renewal of the relationship with Canada's Indigenous peoples. The  Government has further committed to ensure that decisions on projects  undergoing federal environmental assessments will be informed by scientific  evidence and that Indigenous peoples will be more fully engaged in reviewing  and monitoring major projects.

On January 27, 2016, the Government announced the  following interim principles to guide environmental assessments for major  projects as the first part of a broader strategy:

Project reviews will continue within the current  legislative framework and in accordance with treaty provisions.

Decisions will be based on science, and  traditional knowledge of Indigenous peoples.

The views of the public and affected communities  will be sought and considered.

Indigenous peoples will be meaningfully  consulted, and where appropriate, impacts on their rights and interests will be  accommodated.

Direct and upstream greenhouse gas emissions  linked to the projects under review will be assessed.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $16.5 million  over three years, starting in 2016–17, to the National Energy Board, Natural  Resources Canada and Transport Canada to implement the interim approach. This  funding will support public and Indigenous participation in enhanced  consultations in projects undergoing reviews by the National Energy Board and  to support Crown consultations with Indigenous people. Funding provided to the  National Energy Board will be fully cost-recovered from industry.

Supporting  the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency

The Canadian  Environmental Assessment Agency is the main authority responsible for federal  environmental assessments. It conducts environmental assessments, advises the  Minister of Environment and Climate Change in establishing project review panels, and supports the panels in  their work. The Agency also supports the Minister in fulfilling her  responsibilities under the Canadian  Environmental Assessment Act, 2012 , including the development and issuance  of enforceable environmental assessment decision statements. In addition, the  Agency administers a Participant Funding Program that provides support for  individuals, non-for-profit organizations and Indigenous groups to participate  in federal environmental assessments.

Budget 2016 proposes  to provide $14.2 million over four years, starting in 2016–17, to the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency to support the Agency  in fulfilling its responsibilities under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 2012 . These resources  will support activities, such as increasing Agency capacity to undertake  consultations with the public and Indigenous groups, and will support  compliance and enforcement.

Taking Stock  of the Arctic Environment

The Arctic is a vast and dynamic ecosystem as well as  a place of tremendous natural resource potential upon which northern  communities rely for their livelihoods. The Government is committed to early  engagement of Inuit people on potential offshore oil and gas activity in the  Arctic and to ensuring that decision-making  regarding the management of resources is evidence-based and considers possible impacts to the unique environment  and wildlife.

Budget  2016 proposes to provide $19 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada to collaborate with  researchers and Inuit communities to gather existing research and traditional  knowledge of the Arctic environment and conduct new research where gaps in  knowledge exist. This work will help assess the potential environmental impacts of future oil and gas activity in three regions of the  Arctic—the Beaufort Sea, Baffin Bay and Davis Strait, and Kivalliq, Kitikmeot  and the Arctic Islands of Nunavut—and inform whether  oil and gas activity should proceed in these regions.

Improving  Regulatory Review Processes for Major Projects in the North

Large resource development and infrastructure projects are primary  drivers of the northern economy, creating employment and business opportunities,  and generating tax revenues that benefit Northerners and all Canadians. Since  2010, the Northern Projects Management Office has played a vital role in  coordinating the participation of federal departments and agencies in the  regulatory review processes of proposed major resource projects and  infrastructure projects in the North, including environmental assessments,  coordinating federal Crown consultations, and tracking the progress of these  projects in the North.

The Canadian  Northern Economic Development Agency supports development initiatives in the  territories and is the regional delivery agent for the Northern Projects  Management Office. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $10.1 million over four  years, starting in 2016–17, to the Canadian Northern Economic Development  Agency to continue the Agency's leadership role in the Northern Projects  Management Office in improving the timeliness, predictability and transparency  of northern regulatory review processes.



<<< source: ch5-en.html >>>

Chapter 5 - An Inclusive and Fair  Canada

Introduction

Canada is at its best when all citizens have    the opportunity to reach their full potential and are treated fairly, and the    contributions from every segment of society are valued. As a nation, we    are united by these beliefs, which have made Canada a model for    the world.

Budget 2016 delivers on the  Government's agenda to empower all Canadians to build better lives for  themselves and to enable them to contribute to and share in the prosperity of  the country. The investments proposed in Budget 2016 support strong social  policies that create opportunity, build communities, support those who have  worked hard for our country, promote health and well-being, ensure a fair and  accessible justice system, celebrate our heritage and  national institutions, and foster social cohesion.

The December 4, 2015 Speech from the Throne set out an  agenda to empower all Canadians to build better lives for themselves and enable  them to contribute to and share in the prosperity of the country. The measures  in this budget deliver on this agenda, with investments targeted to some of the  most vulnerable segments of society, including seniors and veterans.

The Government will meet its commitments to help all  Canadians retire with security and dignity and to provide veterans with the  support and care they deserve in return for the sacrifices that they have made  for their country.

To eliminate systemic barriers and deliver equality of  opportunity to all Canadians living with disabilities, the Government will  consult with provinces, territories, municipalities and stakeholders to  introduce a Canadians with Disabilities Act. This budget allocates $2 million  over two years, starting in 2016–17, to support the full participation of Canadians  with disabilities in this process.

Canadians are fiercely proud of their country and its place  in the world. The Government will make investments that celebrate our common  heritage and national institutions.

Canadians want to feel safe in their homes, online and in  their communities. This Government proposes measures that will help protect  Canadians by ensuring public safety officers have the necessary equipment and  facilities to investigate serious crime, and to enhance our understanding of  radicalization at home. This budget also promotes Canadians' continued  well-being by improving the safety of our cyber, rail, marine and motor safety  systems and enhances the ability to respond to emergencies both on land and on  our beautiful coasts.

This budget also delivers on the promises made to Canadians  and establishes a foundation for a greater Canada, one that embraces diversity  and inclusion as unique advantages that contribute to our common prosperity and  solidify Canada's place in the world.

Improving the Quality of Life for Seniors

Canada's public pension programs—the Old Age Security  program and the Canada Pension Plan—play an important role in the retirement income  security of Canadians. The Government is committed to implementing changes to  strengthen public pensions and improve the outcomes of Canadian seniors for  today and tomorrow.

Increasing  the Guaranteed Income Supplement for Single Seniors

Canada's retirement income system has been successful in  reducing the incidence of poverty among Canadian seniors. However, some seniors  continue to be at heightened risk of living in low income. In particular,  single seniors are nearly three times more likely to live in low income than  seniors generally.

Budget 2016 proposes to increase the Guaranteed Income  Supplement top-up benefit by up to $947 annually for the most vulnerable single  seniors starting in July 2016, which will support those seniors who rely almost  exclusively on Old Age Security and Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits and  may therefore be at risk of experiencing financial difficulties. This  enhancement more than doubles the current maximum Guaranteed Income Supplement  top-up benefit and represents a 10-per-cent increase in the total maximum  Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits available to the lowest-income single seniors.  This measure represents an investment of over $670 million per year and  will improve the financial security of about 900,000 single seniors across  Canada.

Single seniors with annual income (other than Old Age  Security and Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits) of about $4,600 or less  will receive the full increase of $947. Above this income threshold, the amount  of the increased benefit will be gradually reduced and will be completely  phased out at an income level of about $8,400. Benefits will be adjusted  quarterly with increases in the cost of living.

How Low-income Single Seniors Will    Benefit

Lynn is a 74-year-old resident of Montréal, Quebec, who lives alone.    With no income apart from Old Age Security and Guaranteed Income Supplement    benefits, she struggles to make ends meet. The increase in the Guaranteed    Income Supplement top-up benefit for single seniors proposed in Budget 2016    will provide Lynn with an additional $947 per year.

Charles is a    68-year-old widower residing in Edmonton, Alberta. Charles receives annual    Canada Pension Plan benefits of $5,000 along with Old Age Security and    Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits. The increase in the Guaranteed Income    Supplement top-up benefit for single seniors proposed in Budget 2016 will    provide Charles with an additional $848 per year.

Enhancing the  Canada Pension Plan

The Canada Pension Plan is a strong program that is able to  pool risk among contributors and pay a predictable and lifetime benefit to  Canadians when they retire. It provides a portable, low-cost and modest  pension for all Canadian workers, except workers in Quebec, who contribute to  the Quebec Pension Plan, which provides similar benefits.

Most Canadians approaching retirement age appear to be on  track to adequately replace their working-age income in retirement. However, there  are important concerns about the falling coverage of workplace pension plans in  the private sector. Moreover, Canadians are living longer and healthier lives,  which increases the risk that Canadians might outlive their savings. These  concerns are particularly important for younger Canadians.

An enhanced Canada Pension Plan would represent a major step  in improving retirement outcomes for workers and reducing the uncertainty that  many Canadians feel about being able to enjoy a secure and dignified  retirement.

In  December 2015, this Government began discussions on enhancing the Canada  Pension Plan with provinces and territories, with the goal of being able to  make a collective decision before the end of 2016. In the coming months, the  Government will launch consultations to give Canadians an opportunity to share  their views on enhancing the Canada Pension Plan.

Restoring the  Eligibility Ages of the Old Age Security Program

As an essential part of the Government's plan to strengthen  public pensions and improve the lives of Canadian seniors, the eligibility  ages of the Old Age Security program will be restored. Budget 2016 proposes to  cancel the provisions in the Old Age  Security Act that increase the age of eligibility for Old Age Security and  Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits from 65 to 67 and Allowance benefits from  60 to 62 over the 2023 to 2029 period.

Restoring the eligibility age for Old Age Security and  Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits to 65 will put thousands of dollars back  in the pockets of Canadians as they become seniors. These benefits are an  important part of the retirement income of Canadians, particularly for  lower-income seniors. Vulnerable seniors depend on this support, and without  it, face a much higher risk of living in poverty.

Increased  Support for Senior Couples Living Apart

Senior couples who must live apart for reasons beyond their  control face higher costs of living and are at an increased risk of living in  poverty. Budget 2016 proposes to introduce amendments to the Old Age Security Act that will ensure  that couples who receive Guaranteed Income Supplement and Allowance benefits  and have to live apart for reasons beyond their control (such as a requirement  for long-term care) will receive higher benefits based on their individual  incomes at a total cost of $2.6 million per year. Legislation is already in  place to allow for senior couples who are both Guaranteed Income Supplement  recipients to receive benefits based on their individual incomes if the couple  is living apart for reasons beyond their control. By extending this treatment  to couples receiving Guaranteed Income Supplement and Allowance benefits, the  Government is improving fairness for seniors.

How Low-income Couples Will Benefit

Heather and David have been married for 40 years. David, age 77,    receives annual Canada Pension Plan benefits of $3,000 and Old Age Security    and Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits of over $12,500. Heather, age 62,    has annual earnings from her part-time job of $6,000 and receives over $5,800    in Allowance benefits. Taken together, the Old Age Security program provides    Heather and David with over $18,300 in annual income support.

David requires    long-term care and Heather and David must live apart. Budget 2016 proposes to    allow David and Heather to receive their Guaranteed Income Supplement and    Allowance benefits based on their individual incomes, recognizing the higher    costs of living that Heather and David would face living apart. As a result    of the proposed change, David would receive over $14,300 in Old Age Security    and Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits. Heather would receive about $8,300    in Allowance benefits. Taken together, the Old Age Security program would provide    annual income support of about $22,600, an increase of more than $4,000 from    current levels.

Ensuring  Seniors Benefits Keep Pace With the Cost of Living

The Government is committed to ensuring that Old Age  Security and Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits keep pace with the actual  costs of living faced by seniors. The Government is therefore looking at how a  new Seniors Price Index that reflects the cost of living faced by seniors could  be developed.

Supporting Canada's  Veterans

Veterans and their families have earned Canadians' respect  and gratitude. The Government will give back to those who have given so much in  service to all Canadians. Budget 2016 proposes to restore critical access to  services for veterans as well as ensure the long-term financial security of  disabled veterans. Budget 2016 also proposes measures to honour the service,  sacrifice and accomplishments of those who served in the military.

Enhancing  Services for Veterans

Canada's veterans and their families deserve our care,  compassion and respect. To better support veterans where they live, Budget 2016  proposes to reopen and staff service offices in Charlottetown, Sydney, Corner  Brook, Windsor, Thunder Bay, Saskatoon, Brandon, Prince George and Kelowna,  open an additional office in Surrey, and expand outreach to veterans in the  North by working with local partners. This will make it easier for veterans to  access services across the country.

Budget 2016 also proposes to hire additional case managers  to reduce the client-to-case manager ratio to no more than 25:1. Case managers  represent the first line of intervention to help veterans in their  rehabilitation process and to coordinate referrals to health care providers.  Reducing the client-to-case manager ratio will help veterans make successful  transitions to civilian life.

To implement these measures, Budget 2016 proposes to provide  $78.1 million over five years, starting in 2016–17.

Financial Support  for Veterans

Since the creation of the New Veterans Charter in 2006,  the range of programs, services and benefits under the Charter have been  gradually updated over time. However, veterans groups as well as the Veterans  Ombudsman have noted that the Charter needs to be enhanced to meet the needs of  modern-day veterans. Budget 2016 therefore proposes significant enhancements to  financial benefits for modern-day veterans. The proposed investment includes:

Increasing the Disability Award (maximum  increased to $360,000 in 2017) for injuries or illnesses caused or worsened by  military service, and aligning it with other New Veterans Charter benefits by  indexing it to inflation. Higher Awards would be paid retroactively to all  veterans who have received an Award since the introduction of the New Veterans  Charter in 2006.

Expanding access to higher grades of the  Permanent Impairment Allowance to better support veterans who have had their  career options limited by a service-related illness or injury. The potential  impact of the permanent and severe impairments on veterans' career advancement  opportunities would be considered in determining the appropriate level of  financial support. The benefit would also be renamed Career Impact Allowance to  better reflect the intent of the program.

Increasing the Earnings Loss Benefit to provide  income replacement of 90 per cent of gross pre-release military salary for  injured veterans participating in Veterans Affairs Canada's rehabilitation or  vocational assistance program or with injuries preventing them from suitable  and gainful employment. The indexation of this benefit would also no longer  be capped at 2 per cent and would be allowed to keep pace with inflation.  Finally, the calculation of the minimum benefit would be amended to be based on  a senior private's salary instead of a basic corporal's salary.

These measures represent a significant investment that  would greatly improve income support to disabled veterans, including both  veterans transitioning to the civilian workforce as well as those with injuries  preventing them from suitable and gainful employment. In particular, these  measures would ensure that disabled veterans who are unable to return to the  workforce because of their injuries receive higher lifelong financial support.

In consultation with the veterans' community, the Government  also understands there is a significant desire to better design veterans'  financial support programs going forward—and that the Government should take  the appropriate time to work with veterans to ensure programs meet the needs of  those injured in the line of duty.

Over the next year, the Government will work with the  veterans' community to examine the best way to streamline and simplify the  system of financial support programs currently offered by Veterans Affairs  Canada and National Defence for veterans and their families. The overall  objective of this work will be to ensure that the Government delivers programs  and services in a way that is veterans-centric and facilitates a seamless and  successful transition from military to civilian life.

Based on current projections of demand for the programs, the  Government expects that $1.6 billion over five years, starting in 2016–17,  would flow to veterans and their families in the form of higher direct  payments. However, public sector accounting standards require that the present  value of all increased future payments to eligible recipients be recognized up  front when changes are made to veterans benefit plans. The budgetary expense  associated with the increase in benefits for eligible recipients amounts to  $5.6 billion over six years, starting in 2015–16.

Last Post  Fund

The Government of Canada has a duty to remember the service  and sacrifice of those who served in the military.

The Last Post Fund program provides financial assistance to the  estates of eligible deceased veterans towards the cost of burial and for  funeral services. To expand eligibility for the program to more families  of low-income veterans, Budget 2016 proposes to increase the estate exemption  for the Last Post Fund from roughly $12,000 to roughly $35,000, and apply an  annual cost of living adjustment to the estate exemption going forward.

Based on current projections of demand for the program, the  Government expects that $3.4 million over five years, starting in 2016–17,  would flow to the families of veterans in the form of higher direct payments.  However, public sector accounting standards require that the present value of  all increased future payments to eligible recipients be recognized up front  when changes are made to veterans benefit plans. The budgetary expense  associated with the increase in benefits for eligible recipients amounts to  $25.9 million over six years, starting in 2015–16.

Commemoration

Budget 2016 proposes to merge the Community  War Memorial Program with the Commemorative Partnership Program, and to  expand the scope of the Commemorative Partnership Program to allow funding for  the building of new community war memorials. This will streamline the  application process for Canadians and community groups to gain access to funding  opportunities available for commemorative activities for veterans.

Invictus  Games

On March 16, His Royal Highness Prince Henry of Wales  announced that Toronto will host the 2017 Invictus Games for ill and injured  veterans. The Invictus Games is an international sporting event that promotes  the well-being and rehabilitation of our veteran population, and the Government  is proud to show its support for the organization of the Games in Canada.  Budget 2016 proposes to reallocate funding of $4 million over two years,  starting in 2015–16, and to provide new funding of $6 million in 2016–17 to  support the organization of the Games.

Strengthening  Canada's Health Care System

Canada's publicly funded  health care system is a source of pride and a defining value for Canadians, who  rely on it for timely access to universal, high-quality services based on need,  not ability to pay. However, while Canada's health care system has served Canadians  well, it must be strengthened to better meet the needs of patients as changes  in demographics, disease patterns and technology continue to shift the delivery  of care into homes and communities.

The Government is  committed to working in partnership with provinces and territories to negotiate  a new multi-year health accord that will improve health care in Canada and  boost health outcomes for all Canadians. The Minister of Health has begun  discussions with her provincial and territorial counterparts to enhance the  affordability and accessibility of prescription drugs, improve access to home  care and mental health services, and support pan‑Canadian innovation in the  delivery of health services.

As these  discussions are ongoing, this budget provides immediate investments to support  pan-Canadian progress on accord priorities in the form of support for  innovations within the health care system. In addition, Budget 2016  announces initiatives that will help Canadians maintain and improve their  health, including through expanding access to nutritious food in the North,  enhancing food safety, providing funding for specific men's and women's health  initiatives, improving vaccine uptake and coverage, and investing in concussion  protocols.

Canadian  Foundation for Healthcare Improvement

The Canadian  Foundation for Healthcare Improvement is a not-for-profit organization funded  by the Government of Canada that is dedicated to accelerating health care  improvements and efficiencies. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $39 million  over three years, starting in 2016–17, to the Canadian Foundation for  Healthcare Improvement to support its ongoing efforts to identify and introduce  innovations in the health care system.

Canada Health  Infoway

Canada Health  Infoway is a not-for-profit corporation created in 2001 that provides  leadership and facilitates collaboration with the provinces and territories on  accelerating the development and adoption of electronic health systems. Budget  2016 proposes to provide $50 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to  Canada Health Infoway to support short-term digital health activities in e-prescribing  and telehomecare.

Expanding  Nutrition North Canada

A nutritious diet  is essential to good physical and mental health. Nutrition North Canada helps  alleviate the high cost of food in many northern isolated communities by  providing a subsidy on perishable nutritious food. Culturally appropriate  nutrition education initiatives are also provided to promote the consumption of  a healthy diet. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $64.5 million over five years,  starting in 2016–17, and $13.8 million per year ongoing to expand Nutrition  North Canada to support all northern isolated communities.

Enhancing  Food Safety in Canada

Canada's food  supply is among the safest in the world. At the federal level, the  collaborative efforts of the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Health Canada and  the Public Health Agency of Canada safeguard food and enhance the health and  well-being of consumers in Canada.

Canada's world-class food safety system also  contributes to export opportunities for Canadian agriculture and agri-food  producers and manufacturers. Internationally consistent food safety  requirements help secure and maintain access for Canadian products to foreign  markets. Canada's reputation for high quality and safe food also supports  foreign consumer confidence and demand for Canadian agriculture and agri-food  products.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide  $38.5 million over two years, on a cash basis, starting in 2016–17 to  further strengthen and modernize Canada's food safety system. With this  funding, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency will invest in systems that will  help target inspection activities to the highest-risk domestic  and imported foods. The Agency will also enhance inspection activities  abroad to assist in responding to food safety risks before they reach  domestic consumers.

To help families  make better food choices, the Government will also be taking steps over the  next year to improve food labels to give more information on added sugars and  artificial dyes in processed foods.

Canadian  Partnership Against Cancer

Budget 2016  confirms ongoing funding for the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer at $47.5  million per year. This will allow the organization to continue its work with  cancer agencies and stakeholders, including Indigenous communities, while  engaging patients, care providers and the general public in promoting  innovative approaches to reducing the toll of cancer across Canada. Federal  support for the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer will complement the  initiatives in a new Health Accord currently under discussion with provinces  and territories.

Improving  Heart Health for Women

Heart disease and stroke are a leading cause of death among Canadian  women. In fact, most Canadian women have at least one risk factor for heart  disease and stroke—yet many women are not aware of this threat and do not know  how to recognize the symptoms until it is too late. Budget 2016 proposes to  provide $5 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to the Heart and  Stroke Foundation to support targeted research on women's heart health and to  promote collaboration between research institutions across the country. This  funding will help lay the ground work for ensuring women have access to high  quality care that is attentive to the inherent differences in the diagnosis and  treatment of heart disease and stroke in women and men.

Tackling Men's  Health

Men face unique health challenges. Canadian men are 79 per  cent more likely than women to die from heart disease, 57 per cent more likely  to die from diabetes, and account for 82 per cent of alcohol related death, yet  70 per cent of men's health conditions and diseases are preventable. In  order to help raise awareness of men's health issues, Budget 2016 proposes to  provide $4 million over the next four years, starting in 2016–17, to the Canadian  Men's Health Foundation to provide men with information about how they can make  lifestyle and behavioural changes to improve their health.

Improving  Immunization Coverage Rates

Vaccine  preventable diseases are still present in some areas of Canada and can lead to  serious disability and even death. To help ensure the ongoing health  and safety of Canadians, particularly children and those who are  immunocompromised, such as the elderly, high levels of immunization coverage among  Canadians is required. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $25 million  over five years, starting in 2016–17. With this funding, the Public Health  Agency of Canada will update the national immunization coverage goals and  disease reduction targets, improve Canada's ability to identify under- and  un-immunized Canadians, and develop a focused program to improve vaccine access  and uptake.

Harmonization  of Concussion Management Guidelines

Many individuals,  particularly children and youth, experience concussions during sport and  recreation activities, sometimes with needless and tragic outcomes. More work  is needed to harmonize concussion management guidelines across Canada. Budget  2016 proposes to provide $1.4 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to  allow the Public Health Agency of Canada to work with provinces and territories  on this important issue with a  focus on athlete and student return-to-play and return-to-learn protocols.

Improving Canada's  Justice System

The right to a fair  trial for all Canadians is a fundamental underpinning of Canadian democracy.  The Government has committed to a respectful relationship with Canadian courts,  which uphold the rule of law and provide forums to resolve disputes and test  laws in a fair and rational manner. Measures included in Budget 2016 will help  Canadians assert their rights and provide disadvantaged Canadians access to a  justice system that is fair, modern and efficient.

Taking Action  Against Guns and Gangs

The Government  remains committed to removing handguns and assault weapons from our streets.  Over the next year, the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness will  be working with his provincial, territorial and municipal counterparts to  develop a strategy on how the federal government can best support communities  and law enforcement in their ongoing efforts to make it harder for criminals to  get and use these weapons and to reduce guns and gang  violence in our communities.

In addition, as  the Government consults Canadians on the framework for the legalization of  marijuana, it will work to ensure that any new regime must protect young  Canadians by keeping marijuana out of the hands of children and youth.

Reinstating  the Court Challenges Program of Canada

The Government is committed to  safeguarding Canada's official languages and equality rights, including  protecting the rights of women and minorities. The Court Challenges Program provides  financial assistance for individuals and groups who wish to clarify their  language and equality rights in Canada's courts. This program has been  instrumental in bringing cases to the courts that clarify and assert Charter  rights. Budget 2016 proposes to provide new funding of $12 million over  five years to support the Court Challenges Program of Canada. When combined  with existing federal investments, total funding will be $5 million  annually.

In a vast and    diverse country like Canada, the only way to provide equal protection to    everyone is to enshrine basic rights and freedoms in the Constitution. The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms gave Canadians the ability to appeal to the Courts if they felt their    constitutional rights had been infringed or denied.
        The Court    Challenges Program has been instrumental in helping Canadians bring to the    courts questions that have helped define these rights, in particular our    official languages rights in our classrooms, workplaces, and within the    justice system.

The    Canadian Bar Association was a longtime supporter of the Court Challenges    Program, has always supported it, and has seen it as a fundamental    institution in Canadian democracy.

Ensuring Access to Justice

Access to criminal legal aid promotes justice for economically  disadvantaged persons and helps ensure the Canadian justice system remains fair  and efficient. Federal, provincial and territorial governments each contribute  to the delivery of legal aid. Budget 2016 provides $88 million over five years,  starting in 2016–17, to increase funding in support of the provision of  criminal legal aid in Canada.

A More  Efficient Federal Court System

Canadians expect a justice system that is accessible  and efficient. The Courts Administration Service is an arm's-length federal  organization that provides support to the Federal Court of Appeal, the Federal  Court, the Court Martial Appeal Court of Canada and the Tax Court of Canada.  Federal Courts judges prepare files, conduct hearings and write decisions at  locations across Canada. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $7.9 million over  five years to the Courts Administration Service to invest in information  technology infrastructure upgrades to safeguard the efficiency of the federal  court system. Budget 2016 also proposes to provide up to $2.6 million over two  years on a cash basis to help relocate the Quebec City Federal Courts facility,  thereby ensuring continued Federal Courts presence in Quebec City.

Investing in Arts  and Culture

Canada's heritage,  shaped by our diversity, deserves to be celebrated and shared.

Our cultural industries represent a key sector of our  economy and the intersection of art, science and technology offers infinite  opportunities to innovate and problem solve. Investing in the Canadian cultural sector helps to create jobs,  strengthens the economy and ensures that the unique Canadian perspective is  shared with the world. Measures included in Budget 2016 will support important  national institutions, safeguard our two official languages, and promote  industries that highlight Canada's culture by investing $1.9 billion over five  years. These investments include funding of $168.2 million over two years  for the Canada Cultural Spaces Fund, being proposed as part of the Government's  commitment to social infrastructure.

Finally, as we move  closer to the 150th anniversary of Confederation in 2017,  the Government will work with its partners to ensure that all Canadians  will have the opportunity to participate in local, regional, national and  international celebrations.

Investing in  Arts and Cultural Organizations

Investing in Canadian cultural and creative industries  allows Canadian artists to share their stories at home and abroad. Budget 2016  provides $1.3 billion over five years, starting in 2016–17, to support  longstanding arts and cultural organizations, as follows:

The  Minister of Canadian Heritage will work with the Canadian Broadcasting  Corporation/Radio-Canada to develop a five-year accountability plan. Budget  2016 proposes to invest $675 million in the Canadian Broadcasting  Corporation/Radio-Canada to disseminate and support world-class Canadian  content and to provide Canadians with better access to programs and services in  the digital era;

To  foster the development of the arts in Canada through grants, services and awards to professional Canadian artists and  arts organizations, as well as through scholarly awards, Budget 2016 proposes  to invest $550 million in the  Canada Council for the Arts;

To  provide funding and promotion programs dedicated to the cultural, commercial and  industrial success of Canada's audiovisual industry, Budget 2016 proposes  to provide Telefilm Canada with $22 million; and

To  create social-issue documentaries,  animation, and digital content, Budget 2016 proposes to provide the  National Film Board of Canada with $13.5 million.

For more than 75    years, the CBC/Radio-Canada has been a vital national institution that brings    Canadians together, promotes and defends our two official languages and supports    our shared culture and values.

An independent    CBC/Radio-Canada continues to adapt to the changing broadcasting landscape    and is transforming the way it engages with Canadians—providing us with    high-quality relevant content how, where and when Canadians want it.

Reversing past cuts    will enable the CBC/Radio-Canada to invest in its Strategy 2020: A space for us all priorities, leading to the    creation of Canadian content which will be more digital, local and ambitious    in scope.

To remain relevant    and successful, the CBC/Radio-Canada needs to invest in new multi-platform    content and more innovative programs. Restored funding will also support    investment in enhanced services, such as the digitization of archives.

This Government    is reinvesting and re-engaging with the CBC/Radio-Canada and will be working    with it as it develops a new vision, mandate and accountability plan to    ensure the institution's long-term sustainability.

Showcasing  Canada's Cultural Industries to the World

Canada's cultural and creative  industries are a vibrant part of our economy and national identity. Our  artists, producers, composers and technicians are world leaders in their  fields. Budget 2016 proposes to invest $35 million over two years, beginning in  2016–17 to support the promotion of Canadian artists and cultural industries  abroad. This funding will immediately help Canadian foreign missions promote  Canadian culture and creativity on the world stage, in particular as Canada  approaches the 150th Anniversary of Confederation. Over the  next year, the Minister of Canadian Heritage will be consulting on how best to  continue to support Canadian cultural exporters as they contribute to inclusive  growth.

Supporting  National Museums

Canada's national  museums are important cultural institutions that play a vital role in  preserving Canada's heritage, educating Canadians and inspiring innovation. For  several years, Canada's national museums have faced financial pressures that  have impacted their ability to implement dynamic and important programs and  exhibitions. Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $105.9 million over five  years, with $6.1 million per year ongoing, to help Canada's national  museums address immediate operational and capital pressures. The allocation of  this funding by institution will be announced at a future date.

As part of the    federal infrastructure initiative in Chapter 2—Growth for the Middle Class,    Budget 2016 proposes to make investments of up to $280.9 million over    five years on a cash basis to support the infrastructure needs of three    important Canadian cultural institutions:

$156.4 million over three years to support    the expansion of the Canada Science and Technology Museum through the    construction of a new collection and conservation centre to preserve and    protect priceless Canadian heritage artifacts;

$114.9 million over two years to support the    renewal of the National Arts Centre, which highlights Canada's performing    arts community; and

$9.6 million over two years to undertake    needed repairs to the National Gallery of Canada, including its iconic    windows.

Enhancing Public  Safety

Threats to Canada and emergencies can arise in many  different ways: through terrorism, organized crime, natural disasters or severe  weather, to name just a few. The Government remains committed to ongoing work  with provinces and territories on a number of important initiatives including  supporting them in their efforts to take illegal guns off our streets and  reduce gang-related violence; ensuring public safety officers have the support  and treatment they need when facing post-traumatic stress disorder; and  recognizing community heroes and supporting their families when tragedy  strikes.

The Government remains committed to repealing the  problematic elements of Bill C-51. Following consultation, the Minister of  Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness will introduce new legislation that  strengthens accountability with respect to national security and better  balances collective security with rights and freedoms.

We need to have the right tools to take action when needed  to keep Canadians safe. Budget 2016 includes several immediate measures that  will support the safety and security of Canadians within our borders.

Office of the  Community Outreach and Counter-Radicalization Coordinator

Success in countering radicalization to violence requires  the support and participation of all levels of government and civil society.  Budget 2016 proposes to provide $35 million over five years, starting in  2016–17, with $10 million per year ongoing, to establish an Office of the  Community Outreach and Counter-radicalization Coordinator. The Office will  provide leadership on Canada's response to radicalization to violence,  coordinate federal/provincial/territorial and international initiatives, and  support community outreach and research.

Strengthening  Heavy Urban Search and Rescue

Swift and effective response to emergencies is critical for  keeping Canadians and communities safe, and heavy urban search and rescue is  primarily used in cases of large-scale incidents. Budget 2016 provides $15.5  million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to restore funding to heavy  urban search and rescue task forces in Vancouver, Toronto, Calgary and  Manitoba, as well as to work with provinces to expand this capacity in  underserved regions.

Royal  Canadian Mounted Police Vancouver Laboratory Relocation

The Royal Canadian Mounted Police's (RCMP) forensic  laboratory services play an important role in supporting law enforcement  investigations through forensic identification and analysis of evidence. Budget  2016 proposes to provide up to $60.4 million over five years on a cash  basis for a new RCMP forensic laboratory to be co-located with the RCMP's  regional headquarters in Surrey, British Columbia. The new, more efficient laboratory  will support the investigation of the most serious and violent crimes, helping  to quickly identify and apprehend offenders, and contribute to enhancing the  safety of Canadians.

As part of the    federal infrastructure initiative in Chapter 2—Growth for the Middle Class,    Budget 2016 proposes to provide more than $128 million over two years on    a cash basis, starting in 2016–17, to improve the physical infrastructure    that is relied upon by law enforcement and intelligence agencies across the    country on a daily basis. This investment will contribute to the    rehabilitation, construction and modernization of facilities of the RCMP, the    Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the Canada Border Services Agency.    The investment will address health and safety concerns for officers, ensure    the continuity of mission-critical operations, repurpose existing spaces to    better meet program requirements and upgrade training facilities, in    particular those at the RCMP Depot Division located in Regina, Saskatchewan.

Reopening the Kitsilano Canadian Coast Guard Facility

The Canadian Coast Guard is responsible for ensuring public  safety on the water and protecting the marine environment along Canada's  coasts, including in the Greater Vancouver area. Port Metro Vancouver is  Canada's busiest port, with $187 billion of annual commercial shipping  activity, in addition to being one of the busiest recreational boating areas in  Canada.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $23.6 million over five  years on a cash basis, starting in 2016–17, to reopen the Kitsilano Search and  Rescue Lifeboat Station in Vancouver as a Coast Guard Base with enhanced marine  emergency response capacity. This will restore search and rescue services in  the area. In addition, activities at Kitsilano will be expanded to include  environmental response capacity, as well as emergency response training for  regional stakeholders and response partners, including Indigenous groups. The  facility will also serve as a Regional Incident Command Post in the event of a  significant marine incident, as recommended in an independent review of the  response to the fuel oil spill from the M/V  Marathassa in April 2015.

The reopening of the Kitsilano Base is an important  investment in a stronger Coast Guard and a critical step towards improving  marine safety off Canada's east and west coasts. Options will be developed over  the coming year to enhance search and rescue capacity in Newfoundland and  Labrador.

The Canadian    Coast Guard oversees the safe and efficient movement of ships through    Canadian waters. To achieve this objective, it operates an extensive network    of aids to navigation such as beacons, buoys and lighthouses. The Marine    Communication and Traffic Services program also makes available distress and    safety communications services to mariners and monitors vessel movements to    ensure a safe and orderly flow of marine traffic.

As part of the    federal infrastructure initiative in Chapter 2—Growth for the Middle Class,    Budget 2016 proposes to provide $45.9 million over two years, on a cash    basis, to the Canadian Coast Guard to improve the dependability and    efficiency of aids to navigation and structures that support Marine    Communication and Traffic Services, such as aging towers. Improvements will    include modernizing power generation at Marine Communication and Traffic    Services and aids to navigation sites by replacing older diesel generators    with cleaner and greener technologies.

Strengthening  the Security of Government of Canada Networks and Cyber Systems

The Government of Canada has an obligation to protect the  personal and corporate information that Canadians provide to the government to  deliver public services. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $77.4 million over  five years, starting in 2016–17, to implement new measures to improve the  security of government networks and information technology systems. These  measures will ensure that the government can better defend its networks and  systems from cyber threats, malicious software and unauthorized access.

Enhancing the  Safety of Railways and the Transportation of Dangerous Goods

Many cities and towns across Canada were established because  of the railroad, and our communities have grown around railway infrastructure  over time. Railways remain critical to the Canadian economy, carrying more than  one third of Canada's trade to and from border crossings and marine ports. The  tragic incident at Lac-Mégantic, on July 6, 2013, highlighted the importance of  rail safety and the regulation of the transportation of dangerous goods.  Following recommendations from the Transportation Safety Board of Canada,  a number of actions have been undertaken, including the implementation of  amendments to the Railway Safety Act along with new regulations and standards, and increased frequency of  inspections of high-risk dangerous goods operations. Rail traffic volumes are  expected to continue to increase, and there are further Transportation Safety  Board recommendations to be implemented. Canadians expect industry and  government to take action to mitigate the risks associated with the movement of  goods by rail through their neighbourhoods.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $143 million over three  years on a cash basis to sustain existing measures and support new and expanded  activities to strengthen oversight and enforcement, and to enhance prevention  and response capabilities related to rail safety and the transportation of  dangerous goods. New measures will include: increased inspection capacity and  improved training for stronger and more consistent oversight across the  country; enhanced systems for testing, classifying, registering and mapping  dangerous goods and their movements, to support better risk management;  increased federal contributions for local investments in safer railway  crossings to help prevent accidents; and additional support for first  responders to provide better tools and the information required to better  protect communities.

Improving  Motor Vehicle Safety

Transport Canada works with industry and government  partners to make Canada's roads the safest in the world. This includes setting  safety standards for the design, construction, and importation of motor  vehicles.

Budget 2016 proposes to provide $7.3 million over two  years to increase inspection capacity and support the development of a  regulatory framework for emerging technologies such as automated vehicles.

As part of the    federal infrastructure initiative in Chapter 2—Growth for the Middle Class,    Budget 2016 proposes to provide $5.4 million, on a cash basis, to the    Motor Vehicle Test Centre in Blainville, Quebec to enhance testing capacity    at the facility. Through these actions, the Government is taking concrete    steps to ensure Canada's transportation system remains safe.



<<< source: ch6-en.html >>>

Chapter 6 - Canada in the World

Introduction

This Government is committed to strengthening  Canada’s place in the world. In order to rebuild our international influence  and have an impact, Canada will re-energize and reinforce our efforts to  support multilateralism. The Government will ensure the Canadian Armed Forces  are equipped to protect Canadians and contribute to international peace and  security, including peace-keeping. The Government will adopt a proactive  approach and a positive tone to its engagement, and will emphasize Canada’s interests  and values. The Government will back its words with actions.

The Government has already made several decisions  resulting in more than $5 billion on a cash basis being invested in  activities that will allow Canada to make a real and valuable contribution to a  more peaceful and prosperous world, including:

$2.65 billion by 2020 on a cash basis, to  address climate change in developing countries;

More than $1.6 billion over three years,  starting in 2016–17, towards security, stabilization, humanitarian and  development assistance for Iraq, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon;

$678 million over six years, starting in 2015–16,  to respond to the Syrian refugee crisis and aid in the resettlement of 25,000  Syrian refugees; and

$100 million in 2015–16 to the United Nations  High Commissioner for Refugees, to help support critical relief activities in  the region.

Through Budget 2016, the Government is making additional  targeted investments to renew Canadian leadership on the world stage. The  Government is also committed to restoring Canada’s reputation as an active and  constructive member of the international community, including through our  engagement with the United Nations and other multilateral  financial institutions.

Active engagement in the world is not without risks. The  international security environment is more complex and challenging, exposing  our personnel abroad to increased threat and risk. The Government is committed  to the duty of care of its employees and will continue to invest in  cost-effective measures that allow our international network to deliver  services to Canadians and advance Canadian interests.

Restoring and Renewing International Assistance

In strengthening Canada’s place in the world, the Government is  committed to refocusing its international assistance on the poorest and most  vulnerable. This means assessing Canada’s development, humanitarian and peace  and security programming to ensure that Canada’s international assistance  priorities are focused on poverty reduction.

Over the next year, the  Government will conduct a review of Canada’s international assistance policy  framework. This review will include consultations with Canadians and  international aid organizations to ensure that all perspectives are heard. The  outcomes of the review will inform Budget 2017, and will take into account the  Government’s international priorities as well as domestic considerations.

Increasing the International Assistance Envelope

In the short term, the  Government will provide immediate funding to Canada’s International Assistance  Envelope (IAE).

IAE resources have declined  overall in recent years. Budget 2016 proposes to allocate new funding to the  IAE, including $256 million over two years (2016–17 to 2017–18) in new resources, that will increase Canada’s ability to  respond to emerging international assistance priorities.

Promoting International Peace and Security

Greater international peace and security helps the  millions of people affected by conflicts and living in fragile states, and  supports a more peaceful world. A safer world is also a more prosperous world  for Canada. Budget 2016 proposes to allocate up to $586.5 million over  three years, starting in 2016–17, from unallocated International Assistance  Envelope resources for the renewal of key peace and security programs. This  includes up to:

$450 million for the Global Peace and Security  Fund, including for initiatives to promote pluralism;

$106.5 million for the International Police  Peacekeeping and Peace Operations Program; and

$30 million for the Counter-Terrorism Capacity  Building Program‑Sahel Envelope.

In addition, on February 8, 2016, the Government committed  more than $1.6 billion over three years, starting in 2016–17, to respond  to the ongoing crisis in Iraq and Syria, and its impact on the region. This  includes more than $1.2 billion to support development, stabilization,  humanitarian and development assistance efforts in the region.

This significant funding will support Canada’s leadership  role in effectively responding to international peace and security challenges  and crises, including peacekeeping.

On February 8,  2016, the Government announced a new approach to respond to the ongoing crisis  in Iraq and Syria, and its impact on the region. The Government has committed  more than $1.6 billion over three years, starting in 2016–17, towards security,  stabilization, humanitarian and development assistance for Iraq, Syria, Jordan  and Lebanon, including:

$306 million in 2016–17 to refocus Canada’s  military mission on training and advising local security forces to take their  fight directly to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Recognizing  the complexity of the challenging security environment, the Government will  assess at a later date whether the mission should be extended beyond March 31,  2017;

$840 million over three years for humanitarian  aid programs designed to provide life-saving assistance;

$270 million over three years in resilience and  development programming, including building local capacity to provide basic  social services; and

$145 million over three years towards  counter-terrorism, stabilization and chemical, biological, radiological and  nuclear security programming.

Expanding Immigration

Canada’s history has  been shaped by immigration. Immigrants bring unique cultures and perspectives,  and make distinctive contributions to Canadian society and the economy. Our  immigration system works best when it strikes a balance between Canada’s  economic needs and Canadians’ core values of compassion and opportunity for  all. That is why the Government recently announced a target of 300,000 for  permanent resident admissions in 2016, representing a 7-per-cent increase over  the 2015 target level. With this new target level, Canada will reunite  families, offer a place of refuge to those fleeing persecution and support  Canada’s long-term economic prosperity. Budget 2016 builds on this commitment by  demonstrating continued leadership with respect to the Syrian refugee crisis  and by making family reunification a priority under Canada’s immigration  policy.

Expanding Canada’s Intake of Syrian Refugees

Canadians have been deeply affected by the refugee crisis in  Syria and the surrounding region, and have expressed the desire to help. In November 2015, the Government  showed leadership by committing $678 million over six years, starting in  2015–16, to resettle 25,000 Syrian refugees by February 29, 2016,  and by committing to resettle  an additional 10,000 government-assisted Syrian refugees over the course of  2016. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $245 million over five years,  starting in 2016–17, for the identification, overseas processing,  transportation and resettlement of the additional 10,000 Syrian refugees.

On November 24, 2015, the Government announced  that it would take immediate action to resettle 25,000 Syrian refugees to  Canada by the end of February 2016, and the Government has fulfilled this  commitment. The Government has worked with communities across Canada to provide  the necessary support to help these refugees begin their new life in Canada.

Reducing Application Processing Times

Family reunification is a key objective of immigration in  Canada but too often it takes too long for family sponsorship decisions to be  taken, leaving families separated for prolonged periods. To address this,  Budget 2016 proposes to provide $25 million in 2016–17 to support faster and  more predictable processing times for family sponsorship. The new funding will  be used to target specific applications backlogs in Canada and overseas, and to  reduce processing times on sponsorship decisions. Through this investment,  application backlogs will be reduced and wait times will be significantly  shortened.

We…call on our  government to promote an immigration and refugee system that respects basic  rights by favouring the speedy reunification of families in the interests of  the healthy, humane, respectful and productive integration of newcomers.

Achieving Higher Permanent Resident Admissions

Canadians welcome those who want to come to Canada and  contribute to our country’s success. That is why the Government recently  announced an increase in the overall target level for permanent resident  admissions for 2016. To support higher admissions levels and to help newcomers  fully integrate into Canadian life and contribute to our economic growth, Budget  2016 proposes to provide $56 million over three years, starting in 2016–17. New  funding would support the processing of new permanent residents and increased  settlement programming. Settlement programs provide immigrants with critical  assistance such as language courses and skills training to facilitate their  transition into the Canadian economy and society.

Improving Export Verifications

Canada needs to ensure that its exports do not pose health,  safety or security threats to Canadians and its allies and that Canada  continues to respect international commitments. The Canada Border Services  Agency’s export verifications support this objective by preventing the  proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the export of goods that  have been obtained illegally. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $13.9 million  over five years, starting in 2016–17, to improve export verifications by  enabling the Agency to enhance identification processes and increase  examination rates of high-risk shipments.

Defending Canada

The Government is steadfast in its commitment to providing  greater security for Canadians. This includes ensuring that the Canadian Armed  Forces have the equipment and personnel required to protect Canadian  sovereignty, defend North America, provide disaster relief, conduct search and  rescue, support United Nations peace operations, and contribute to the security  of our allies and to coalition operations abroad.

The Canadian Armed Forces will continue to  play an important role in the coalition fight against the Islamic State of Iraq  and the Levant (ISIL), and in North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)  assurance measures in Central and Eastern Europe. Budget 2016 also  reaffirms Canada’s contribution to support Ukrainian forces through military  training and capacity-building in 2016–17, in coordination with other  countries providing similar training assistance.

The Government  will conduct an open and transparent process to create a new defence strategy that  will deliver a modern, more agile and better-equipped military. A new defence  strategy will include improved processes to ensure more accurate costing for  major defence procurements and to provide Canadians with regular updates on  project costs and timelines. Over the course of 2016, the Government will seek  the input of Canadians, experts, allies and partners, and Parliament on the  strategic environment for the Canadian Armed Forces, the roles for the Canadian  Armed Forces, and the Canadian Armed Forces size, structure and capabilities.

Renewing Major Equipment for the Canadian Armed Forces

A modern, well-equipped Canadian Armed Forces is needed to  support missions at home and abroad. The Department of National Defence is in  the process of renewing its major equipment, including Canada’s aging fleets of  CF-18 fighter aircraft and maritime warships.

For the  purposes of fiscal planning, funding to support large-scale capital projects  for defence, including the associated operating and sustainment costs, is set  aside in the fiscal framework and managed on an accrual basis. In this context,  the cost of a given capital project is amortized over the useful life of the  asset; for example, a $1-billion capital project with a 25-year useful life  would typically have an amortized expense profile of $40 million per year over  25 years. The amortized costs of all projects cannot exceed the total  funds available for large-scale capital projects in a given year. Cash appropriations  for projects are sought as required by National Defence and are reflected in  the department’s Estimates.

Total funding available to National Defence for large-scale  capital projects is $84.3 billion over 30 years out to 2044–45, and $2.8  billion per year ongoing starting in 2045–46, on an accrual basis. To ensure  that funding is available when key capital acquisitions will be made, funding  that is not yet allocated to specific projects, or that cannot be spent due to  unforeseen delays in planned projects, can be moved forward into future years  when it will be needed.

Budget 2016 proposes to reallocate funding of $3.716  billion for large-scale capital projects from the 2015–16 to 2020–21 period to  future years. This is not a reduction in National Defence’s budget. This will  ensure that funding is available for large-scale capital projects when it is  needed. Funding is being shifted into future years to align with the current  timing of National Defence’s major equipment acquisitions. Chart 6.2 shows  funding for large-scale capital projects available to National Defence prior to  Budget 2016 and following Budget 2016, reflecting the shifting of funding into  future years.

The Government is  committed to ensuring that Canadian Armed Forces personnel and their families  have the support they need, including safe and modern facilities in which to  live, work and train. As part of the federal infrastructure initiative in  Chapter 2—Growth for the Middle Class, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $200.5  million over two years on a cash basis, starting in 2016–17, to National Defence  to undertake infrastructure projects at Canadian Forces Bases and other defence  properties across Canada.

Investments will include:

$77.1 million on projects to support readiness  for Canadian Armed Forces military operations, including investments to repair  and construct live-fire ranges, airfields and hangars and naval jetties across  Canada;

$67.4 million on projects to support the  Reserve Force, including investments to repair and maintain armouries in  Alberta, Ontario, Quebec and Nova Scotia;

$50.0 million on projects to support military  personnel and their families, including investments to upgrade and construct  military housing across Canada; and

$6.0 million on projects to  support northern operations, including investments in airfield ramp  reconstruction that is critical to northern search and rescue and upgrades to  fire suppression systems that directly support the North American Aerospace  Defense Command (NORAD).



<<< source: ch7-en.html >>>

Chapter 7 – Open and Transparent Government

Introduction

Open and transparent government is good government. It strengthens trust in our democracy, and ensures the integrity of our public institutions.

The Government is committed to openness, transparency and collaboration, and will modernize how the Government of Canada operates to better reflect the values and expectations of Canadians.

In the digital era, Canadians have high standards for the service they receive. Dealing with the Government should be no exception. In this budget, the Government proposes measures to improve the quality and timelines of critical client services at the Canada Revenue Agency, takes important steps toward evolving online services through Canada.ca, and sets out to establish new performance standards to promote a better client experience for Canadians when they interact with the Government.

Canadians also expect government to be open and transparent. The Government is committed to making government more transparent and will enhance Canadians’ access to government information, including by reviewing the Access to Information Act , streamlining requests for personal information and making more government data available.

Improving  Service for Canadians

Improving  Client Services at the Canada Revenue Agency

Service excellence is a top priority for the Canada  Revenue Agency (CRA). Canadians deserve high-quality services delivered in a  way that makes them feel respected and valued. Budget 2016 proposes $185.8  million over five years, starting in 2016–17, and $14.6 million ongoing for the  CRA to address the Government’s commitments to service excellence through a number  of initiatives.

The CRA answers over 23 million calls in a  typical year, but for a number of years, Canadians have been frustrated by  frequent busy signals and long wait times to get the answers they need. By  investing in the enhancement of telephone services, caller accessibility will  be improved through reduced wait times and less frustration for millions of  callers. In addition, the Government proposes to introduce a new dedicated  telephone support line that will be piloted for tax service providers, giving  them greater access to CRA information to the benefit of the millions of  clients they serve.

The CRA sends out over 130 million pieces of  correspondence each year, but many of these letters are difficult to understand  and at times can be confusing. In response, the Government proposes to invest  in revamping the structure, design and format of its correspondence to ensure  all communication is straightforward and easy to read. Over the next three years,  virtually all of the CRA’s correspondence for individuals and businesses will  be in this new, easy to read format.

The CRA works with local community organization  volunteers to help eligible Canadians with modest incomes complete their tax  returns; this program ensures that lower-income individuals receive the tax  benefits that they are entitled to. Budget 2016 proposes a further investment  to expand this program, ensuring even more vulnerable Canadians receive the  assistance they need. In addition, Budget 2016 proposes additional funding to  implement a targeted strategy aimed at notifying lower-income non-filers who  are likely eligible to receive tax credits.

Pertaining to rules governing charities and  their political activities, the CRA, in consultation with the Department of  Finance, will engage with charities through discussions with stakeholder groups  and an online consultation to clarify the rules governing the political  activities of charities.

Through proposed service enhancements, capacity  will be increased to resolve taxpayer objections and ensure that taxpayers are  provided with certainty of their tax obligations as soon as possible. Providing  more timely resolution of objections will ensure that taxpayers are treated  fairly and their concerns are dealt with quickly.

In addition to offering a new level of service excellence  from the CRA, the proposed enhancements will promote increased compliance and  fairness by making it easier for taxpayers to avoid errors and comply with  their tax obligations, allowing the CRA to direct its compliance efforts  towards cracking down on tax evasion and aggressive tax avoidance.

The focus on improved  client service will allow the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to proactively  contact individuals who are entitled to, but are not receiving, tax benefits.  In particular this initiative will help lower-income earners complete and file  their tax returns. These actions will benefit lower-income earners  including seniors, Indigenous people, and people with disabilities.

The Canadian personal  income tax system provides many credits specifically designed to benefit  lower-income Canadians (e.g., the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax  Credit). However, each year a number of these taxpayers do not file a tax return,  causing them to miss out on potential tax benefits.

Under this proposal,  the CRA would send out letters to individuals who have not filed a tax return,  informing them that they are potentially entitled to benefits. This initiative,  which will have an ongoing cost of about $1.8 million per year beginning in  2016–17, will help these taxpayers receive the tax benefits they are entitled  to.

The Community  Volunteer Income Tax Program is offered to eligible individuals with a modest  or low income. Through this program, community organizations host tax  preparation clinics and arrange for volunteers to prepare income tax and  benefit returns free of charge each year. Last year, over 2,300 community  organizations and 17,000 volunteers prepared and filed more than half a million  tax returns nationally.

Budget 2016 proposes an  ongoing investment of about $4.0 million per year, beginning in 2016–17,  to allow the CRA to extend coverage of the Community Volunteer Income  Tax Program and reach out to a larger number of vulnerable and low-income  Canadians, including seniors, newcomers (targeting Syrian refugees), persons  with disabilities, and Indigenous people.

Government of Canada Service Strategy

The Government is committed to making it easier to  access government services online and to establishing new performance standards  for federal services. To support this commitment, Budget 2016 proposes to  provide $17.8 million over five years to the Treasury Board Secretariat to  support the development of a Government of Canada client-first service strategy  and to complete the migration of government websites to Canada.ca.

Opening Government  and Engaging Canadians

Enhancing  Access to Information

Transparency includes providing Canadians with timely access  to their own personal information held by government. To make it easier for  Canadians to access government information, including their personal  information, the Government proposes to create a simple, central website where  Canadians can submit requests to any government institution. This will be backed  up with a 30‑day guarantee for personal information requests: should a request  take longer than 30 days to fulfill, the Government will provide a written  explanation for the delay to the requester and to the Privacy Commissioner. Budget  2016 proposes to provide the Treasury Board Secretariat with $12.9 million  over five years for these activities.

In addition, informed by consultations with the Information  Commissioner and stakeholders, and advice from Parliamentarians, the Government  will move forward on our commitments to revitalize access to information,  including empowering the Information Commissioner to order government  information to be released, and ensuring that the Access to Information Act applies appropriately to the Prime  Minister’s and Ministers’ Offices, as well as to administrative institutions  that support the courts and Parliament.

Expanding Open Data Initiatives

The Government is committed to accelerating and  expanding open data initiatives and to better involving Canadians in  policy-making. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $11.5 million over five years to  double the Treasury Board Secretariat’s budget for open government activities.  This funding will allow the Treasury Board Secretariat to enhance its capacity  to support engagement with Canadians, to design and deliver an ambitious open  government strategy and to accelerate the provision of digital content.

Electoral  Reform

The Government has committed to restore public trust and  faith in the political system by demonstrating to Canadians that their votes  count and help shape the policies their governments pursue. As a first step,  the Government is committed to working with Parliamentarians to establish a  special all-party committee with a mandate to study electoral reform options  that would be the basis for a cross-country consultation. Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $10.7  million over four years, starting in 2016–17, to conduct outreach, raise  awareness and encourage the participation of Canadians in consultations on  voting system reform. This will complement the work of the Parliamentary  committee so that reforms to our democratic institutions are developed  through an open and transparent engagement process that includes all Canadians.

Parliamentary  Approval of Government Borrowing

In 2016–17, the Government will propose legislative  amendments to require Parliamentary approval of Government borrowing to enhance  transparency and accountability to Parliament.

Better Government  for Canadians

Focusing on  Outcomes

To ensure that the  Government delivers on its commitments, a new results and delivery  approach will be implemented that includes the establishment of the Cabinet  Committee on Agenda, Results and Communications, chaired by the Prime  Minister, and a Results and Delivery Unit, housed in the Privy  Council Office.

By focusing on  outcomes for Canadians and making evidence-based decisions that are anchored in  meaningful data and indicators, the Government is moving to a culture of  measurement and impact, and is putting in place the tools to deliver on  priorities, align resources to programs and activities that deliver real value  for Canadians, and provide meaningful information to Canadians and Parliament.

The Privy Council Office also plays a key role in  ensuring the smooth functioning of the Cabinet decision-making process and  facilitating the implementation of the Government’s agenda. The Government has  committed to increasing its engagement with provinces and territories, putting  more focus on digital communications, and making changes to Canada’s democratic  institutions, such as revising the processes for Governor in Council  appointments and Senate appointments and implementing electoral reform.

To ensure that the department has the resources required to  effectively support the Government’s agenda, as well as to strengthen security  and make required investments in lifecycle updates to systems and buildings,  Budget 2016 proposes to provide up to $49 million in 2016–17 and up to $50  million in 2017–18 to the Privy Council Office. The Government will introduce legislation, as necessary, to ensure that  government is organized to provide better outcomes for Canadians.

Strengthening the Public Service

The Government is committed to a strong, respectful and  productive relationship with the Public Service of Canada, which is a source of  comparative advantage for Canada and one of the very best in the world. Each  and every time a government employee comes to work, they do so in service to  Canada, with the goal of improving our country and the lives of all Canadians.  The Government, under the leadership of the President of the Treasury Board, is  committed to further strengthening this world-class institution, to ensure that  it is innovative, agile, collaborative and high-performing, providing  evidence-based advice and high-quality programs and services that meet the  needs and expectations of Canadians in communities across the country. The  Government is committed to the development of public service leaders and in  ensuring that ongoing workplace improvement is based on evidence through  employee surveys.

Reviewing  Spending and the Tax System

The Government has committed to eliminate poorly targeted  and inefficient programs, wasteful spending, and ineffective and obsolete  government initiatives. As a first step towards meeting this commitment, Budget  2016 announces annual reductions of $221 million in professional services,  travel and government advertising, starting in 2016–17. Going forward,  under the leadership of the President of the Treasury Board, the Government  will identify other changes and better align government spending with  priorities.

In addition, the Government  remains committed to ensuring federal tax expenditures are fair for Canadians,  efficient and fiscally responsible. Individuals and businesses have expressed  concerns related to the efficiency and fairness of the tax system, and how the  increasing number of tax expenditures has made the federal tax system more  complex. In the coming year, the Government will undertake a review of the tax  system to determine whether it works well for Canadians, with a view to eliminating  poorly targeted and inefficient tax measures.

Investing in Government Information Technology

Since its creation in 2011, Shared Services Canada has  worked towards consolidating key Government of Canada information technology  (IT) infrastructure in order to achieve savings from economies of scale. The  Auditor General of Canada, however, recently identified challenges at Shared  Services Canada, including adequately demonstrating that it can meet its  objectives of maintaining or improving IT services to effectively serve  Canadians. Investing in mission critical systems is essential to ensuring that  the Government can meet these objectives and provide high-quality services to  Canadians. To this end, Budget 2016 proposes to provide $383.8 million on a cash  basis over
  2016–17 and 2017–18 to Shared Services Canada to support the transformation of  government IT systems, data centres and telecommunications networks.

Transforming  Government Back Office Systems

Federal government departments and agencies currently have  their own human resources management, financial management and information  management platforms. This myriad of platforms makes it difficult to assemble  enterprise-wide data for Canadians, and to achieve value for money through back  office efficiencies. Budget 2016 proposes to provide $75.2 million over two years  to support the replacement of these platforms with Government-wide systems.  Once completed, this back office transformation initiative is expected to  result in significantly lower annual costs to operate and maintain these  functions, and will help deliver better services to Canadians.

Bargaining in  Good Faith With Federal Government Unions

A new round of collective bargaining between the Government  and federal public service bargaining agents began in 2014, with all 59 federal  public service collective agreements up for renewal. The Government is  committed to negotiating in good faith to reach agreements that are fair for  public service employees and Canadians.

Demonstrating  its commitment to fully respect the collective bargaining process, the  Government has already introduced new legislation to repeal the legislative  provisions that provide it with the power to make unilateral changes to the  disability and sick leave system. It also reversed the previous Government’s  decision to book savings in respect of changes to the public service disability  and sick leave system in advance of the completion of negotiations. The  Government will also consult on changes to the Public Service Labour Relations Act introduced through the 2013  Budget Implementation Act.

Increasing  Capacity at Status of Women Canada

Public policies impact men and women differently, and the  Government must take these differences into account when making decisions. To  this end, Budget 2016 proposes to increase capacity at Status of Women Canada.  Funding would be used to expand the Agency’s regional presence across Canada to  support local organizations working on women’s issues and gender equality.  Proposed funding would also ensurefederal government for more informed decision-making, and  would support the creation of a dedicated research and evaluation unit within  the Agency to provide evidence-based, innovative research with respect to  women’s issues. Total investments would be $23.3 million over five years,  starting in 2016–17.

Treasury  Board Program Integrity Process

Building better government means being responsive to  managing critical program and operational risks that emerge due to factors such  as evolving workload pressures, asset rust-out, program price inflation and  other program cost drivers. In this spirit, the Treasury Board will address  government-wide program integrity issues with a view to improving client  service and ensuring employee health and safety. For example, organizations  such as the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the Canadian Coast Guard are  departments that have been identified as requiring incremental funding to  deliver mission-critical services to Canadians.

To address these and other risk management issues, Budget  2016 proposes to allocate $500 million over two years, starting in 2016–17, to  support the Treasury Board process. As specific decisions are  taken, the amounts will be transparently submitted for Parliamentary approval  through the Estimates process.



<<< source: ch8-en.html >>>

Chapter 8 – Tax Fairness and a Strong Financial Sector

Introduction

The Government is committed to preventing underground economic activity, tax evasion and aggressive tax planning. Budget 2016 provides increased resources to ensure more effective administration and enforcement of tax laws, and proposes actions to improve the integrity of Canada’s tax system. Budget 2016 also sets out certain other tax measures that affect businesses and individuals.

The financial sector plays a vital role in Canada’s economy. Budget 2016 proposes measures to reinforce its soundness, enhance competition and better serve users’ needs.

Making the Tax  System More Fair

As a matter of fairness for all taxpayers, it is important  to prevent underground economic activity, tax evasion and aggressive tax  planning. This involves providing the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) with  sufficient resources to administer and enforce tax laws effectively. This  effort also requires legislative and other actions to improve the integrity of  Canada’s tax system—on both the international and domestic fronts—to ensure  that the system is functioning as intended. Budget 2016 proposes several  actions that improve the fairness and integrity of the tax system. These  actions will help support the objective of an economy that works for everyone.

Improving Tax  Compliance

To help ensure that all taxpayers pay their fair share of  taxes, Budget 2016 proposes a number of measures to prevent evasion and improve  tax compliance.

Cracking Down  on Tax Evasion and Combatting Tax Avoidance

Tax evasion and aggressive tax avoidance by individuals and  businesses entail a fiscal cost to governments and taxpayers, and reduce the  fairness and integrity of the tax system. Budget 2016 proposes to invest $444.4 million  over five years for the CRA to enhance its efforts to crack down on tax evasion  and combat tax avoidance by: hiring additional auditors and specialists;  developing robust business intelligence infrastructure; increasing verification  activities; and improving the quality of investigative work that targets  criminal tax evaders.

As the CRA has a proven track record of meeting expectations  from targeted compliance interventions, Budget 2016 accounts for the expected  revenue impact of $2.6 billion over five years from these measures. These  amounts do not reflect the gain that will be realized by provinces and  territories, whose tax revenues will increase as a result of these initiatives.

Enhancing Tax  Collections

The success of the CRA’s work  in combatting aggressive tax planning, the underground economy and tax evasion is  diminished when assessed revenues are not collected by the CRA. Budget 2016  proposes to provide $351.6 million over five years for the CRA to improve  its ability to collect outstanding tax debts. It is anticipated that this  proposal will lead to the collection of an additional $7.4 billion in tax  debt over five years. This strategy will complement existing efforts to  encourage earlier payment of outstanding tax liabilities and work with those  who cannot pay the full amount when due.

As a matter of  fairness for all taxpayers, it is important to prevent underground economic  activity, tax evasion and aggressive tax planning. A key part of this effort is  ensuring that the CRA has sufficient resources to administer and enforce tax  laws effectively.

In recent years, the  CRA has taken significant action to detect, correct and deter non-compliance.  This has included increasing the focus on high-risk segments of the population,  reinforcing strategic partnerships with key countries and organizations,  developing business intelligence tools to maximize the use of all available tax  data, and enhancing risk assessment capacity.

Further  investments to crack down on tax evasion and combat tax avoidance will increase  the CRA’s ability to find those who aggressively evade or avoid taxes, making  the tax system fairer for everyone.

To do this, the CRA will hire additional  auditors and tax specialists, develop a more robust business intelligence  infrastructure, increase verification activities, and improve the quality of  investigative work that targets criminal tax evaders.

The CRA will also continue  ramping up its outreach efforts to ensure that taxpayers understand and meet  their tax obligations. These efforts improve tax compliance through a “get it  right from the start” approach to educate, inform and support taxpayers by  improving service and encouraging voluntary compliance.

Enhancing Tax  Integrity

Canada’s tax system  needs ongoing adjustment to ensure that it is functioning as intended and  contributing to the objective of an economy that works for everyone. Regular  adjustments to address tax planning are consistent with the principles of  fairness, economic efficiency and responsible fiscal management.

Internationally, Canada is actively engaged  in coordinated multilateral efforts to address base erosion and profit shifting  (BEPS) and to increase transparency through the automatic exchange of financial  account information between tax authorities. Domestically, a key challenge is  to prevent unintended tax advantages that businesses and high-net-worth  individuals may be able to obtain through sophisticated tax planning techniques  involving private corporations and other mechanisms.

Budget 2016  proposes actions to improve the integrity of Canada’s tax system, on both the  international and domestic fronts, to protect the revenue base and give  Canadians greater confidence that the system is fair to everyone. These actions  also help protect provincial revenues on our shared tax bases.

Strengthening  International Tax Integrity

Canada and other members of the G20  and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) have worked together to develop recommendations  aimed at addressing BEPS. This refers to international tax planning  arrangements undertaken by multinational enterprises to inappropriately  minimize their taxes, for example by shifting taxable profits away from the  jurisdiction where the underlying economic activity has taken place.

As part of its commitment to protect the integrity of the  Canadian tax base, the Government of Canada is acting on certain  recommendations of the BEPS project:

Budget 2016 proposes new legislation to  strengthen transfer pricing documentation by introducing country-by-country  reporting for large multinational enterprises;

The Canada Revenue Agency is applying revised  international guidance on transfer pricing by multinational enterprises, which  provides an improved interpretation of the arm’s-length principle; and

Canada is participating in international work to  develop a multilateral instrument to streamline the implementation of  treaty-related BEPS recommendations, including addressing treaty abuse.

The Canada Revenue  Agency will also undertake the spontaneous exchange with other tax  administrations of tax rulings that could potentially give rise to BEPS  concerns.

The Government is also protecting the integrity of  Canada’s international tax system by taking action in other areas.  Specifically, Budget 2016 proposes to:

Extend the application of the income tax  back-to-back loan rules to royalty arrangements, and introduce a similar set of  rules in the shareholder loan rules; and

Prevent unintended, tax-free cross-border  distributions of capital to non-residents by narrowing the application of an  existing exception to the cross-border anti-surplus-stripping rule.

The Government is committed to strengthening  efforts to combat international tax evasion and avoidance. The exchange of  information between tax authorities is an important tool to promote compliance,  combat international tax evasion and ensure public confidence in the fairness  of the tax system. In November 2015, G20 Leaders reaffirmed their commitment to  undertake the automatic exchange of information with respect to financial  accounts held by non-residents, under the framework of the Common Reporting  Standard developed by the OECD. More than 90 jurisdictions have committed to implement  the new standard. Canada intends to implement the standard starting on July 1,  2017, allowing for first exchanges of information with other countries in 2018.  The Government will issue legislative proposals for public comment in the near  future.

Enhancing  Domestic Tax Integrity

A concern on the domestic front is the ability of  high-net-worth individuals to use private corporations to inappropriately  reduce or defer tax. To help address this, and as early action in the context  of the review of the tax system to be completed in the coming year, Budget 2016  proposes measures to:

Prevent business owners from multiplying access  to the $500,000 small business deduction using complex partnership and corporate  structures;

Ensure that investment income derived from an  associated corporation’s active business is ineligible for the small business  deduction (and taxed at the general corporate income tax rate) in certain  circumstances;

Ensure that associated corporations cannot avoid  the $15-million taxable capital limit in certain circumstances; and

Close loopholes that allow private corporations  to use a life insurance policy to distribute amounts tax-free that would  otherwise be taxable.

Budget 2016 also proposes  measures to:

Preserve the integrity of the foreign exchange  computational rules in transactions typically referred to as debt-parking  transactions;

Prevent the asymmetrical recognition of gains  and losses on derivatives for tax purposes;

Prevent the deferral of capital gains tax by  investors in mutual fund corporations structured as switch funds;

Introduce a new rule that would effectively  treat the portion of any gain realized on the sale of a linked note that is  attributable to the variable return on the note as accrued interest on the note;  and

Ensure that excise tax relief for diesel fuel  used as heating oil or to generate electricity is targeted to specific  instances.

Integrity measures  proposed in this budget are expected to increase tax revenues by more than $1.2  billion over five years starting in 2016–17.

Following consultations in 2015, Budget 2016  also confirms the Government’s intent to maintain a rule that allows income  earned from property to qualify as active business income where a business  has more than five full-time employees.

Going forward, the  Government will continue to identify and address tax planning schemes to ensure  that the tax system operates as fairly and effectively as possible.

Other Tax Measures

Certain  other tax measures affecting businesses and individuals are set out below. All  new tax measures proposed in Budget 2016 are described in detail in the  accompanying document Tax Measures:  Supplementary Information .

Small  Business Income Tax Rate

Small  businesses—from health care professionals to small manufacturers—provide important  goods and services, create opportunities and strengthen communities across  Canada. They also benefit from a supportive tax environment, including a  reduced income tax rate of 10.5 per cent on their first $500,000 of active  business income. This reduced rate allows them to retain more earnings that can  be reinvested to support growth and job creation.

Budget 2016  proposes that further reductions in the small business income tax rate be deferred.

Eligible Capital  Property

Eligible capital property for income tax purposes includes  intangible property such as goodwill and licences, franchises and quotas of  indeterminate duration, as well as certain other rights. Budget 2016 proposes  to simplify the income tax system by repealing the eligible capital property  regime and replacing it with a new capital cost allowance (CCA) class. As part  of this change, Budget 2016 also proposes to allow small balances of eligible  capital property carried over to the new CCA class to be deducted more quickly,  and to allow up to $3,000 in incorporation costs to be deducted as a current  expense. The latter measure will allow approximately 80 per cent of newly  incorporated businesses to deduct the full amount of the incorporation expenses  in their initial year.

Donations of Real  Estate and Shares of Private Corporations

Budget 2015 included a proposal to provide, beginning in  2017, an income tax exemption in respect of capital gains on certain  dispositions of private corporation shares or real estate, where cash proceeds  from the disposition are donated to a registered charity or other qualified  donee within 30 days. Budget 2016 confirms that the Government does not  intend to proceed with this measure.

Accelerated  Capital Cost Allowance for Liquefied Natural Gas Facilities

An accelerated capital cost allowance (CCA) is currently  available for certain liquefied natural gas (LNG) facilities. For assets  acquired before 2025, an effective CCA rate of 30 per cent is available  for eligible liquefaction equipment and 10 per cent for related buildings.  This treatment serves as an incentive to invest in new facilities that supply  LNG to new markets. Consistent with Canada’s G20 commitment to eliminate fossil  fuel subsidies over the medium term, the Government intends to maintain this tax  preference as currently legislated and allow it to expire as scheduled.

Restoring the  Labour-sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Tax Credit

To facilitate access to venture capital for small and  medium-sized businesses and support saving by the middle class, Budget 2016  proposes to restore the Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital Corporations (LSVCC)  tax credit to 15 per cent for share purchases of provincially registered LSVCCs  for 2016 and subsequent tax years. The measure will provide federal tax relief  of about $815 million over the 2015–16 to 2020–21 period.

Strengthening the Financial Sector to Support  Economic Growth

Canada’s financial sector framework balances the objectives  of stability, competition, and meeting the evolving needs of consumers and businesses.  The financial sector plays a vital role in allocating capital efficiently  to businesses and households across the economy. It must continue to do so  effectively to ensure that Canada’s economic growth will be long-lasting  and inclusive.

Canada’s financial sector is world-renowned and has remained  resilient and stable through the darkest days of the financial crisis and its  aftermath. However, the strength of the Canadian financial sector should not be  taken for granted or stand in the way of measures to reinforce its soundness,  enhance competition and better serve users’ needs.

This is all the more important at a time when new market  forces and risks, including financial technology, changing global regulation,  and an uncertain global economic and market environment are presenting  challenges to Canada’s economy and financial system.

The Government is committed to advancing measures that will  foster conditions that allow federally regulated financial institutions and  pension funds to build on their current strengths and adapt to a changing  world, while ensuring risks and vulnerabilities are monitored closely and  addressed effectively.

Enhancing  Consumer Protection

Canadians deserve  financial consumer protection that keeps pace in meeting their needs. In  addition, the financial consumer protection framework must provide clarity to  guide the operations of federally regulated banks.

Amendments to the Bank Act will be proposed to modernize  the financial consumer protection framework by clarifying and enhancing  consumer protection through a new chapter in the Act. They will reaffirm the  Government’s intent to have a system of exclusive rules to ensure an efficient  national banking system from coast to coast to coast. The Government will collaborate  with provinces, territories, and stakeholders to support the implementation of  the framework, as well as to enhance consumer education and financial literacy.

The current financial consumer protection framework for banking is designed to give consumers the tools they need to make appropriate financial decisions. Existing provisions are dispersed throughout the Bank Act and related regulations. The new consumer chapter of the Act will bring together these disparate provisions to create a comprehensive, consolidated framework and include targeted and more flexible consumer protection rules to better respond to Canadians’ changing needs. It will also provide a set of guiding principles, reflecting that banks should act fairly and responsibly and that consumers should be able to make informed financial decisions for themselves. The Financial Consumer Agency of Canada will continue to oversee compliance with the regulatory framework and work with stakeholders to enhance consumer education and financial literacy initiatives with a focus on managing household finances and debt.

Renewing Financial Sector Legislation

The federal  financial institutions statutes contain sunset provisions mandating renewal of  banking and insurance legislation by Parliament every five years, providing an  opportunity to examine the legislative and regulatory framework in light of  emerging trends and developments, to ensure it remains robust and technically  sound.

The Department of  Finance will undertake a financial sector legislative review and begin  consulting stakeholders in the coming months. To support the review, Budget  2016 proposes to provide the Department of Finance with $4.2 million over  five years, starting in 2016–17, and to extend the current statutory sunset  date by two years to March 29, 2019.

Introducing a  Bank Recapitalization “Bail-in” Regime

To protect Canadian taxpayers in the unlikely event of a  large bank failure, the Government is proposing to implement a bail-in regime  that would reinforce that bank shareholders and creditors are responsible for  the bank’s risks—not taxpayers. This would allow authorities to convert  eligible long-term debt of a failing systemically important bank into common shares  to recapitalize the bank and allow it to remain open and operating. Such a  measure is in line with international efforts to address the potential risks to  the financial system and broader economy of institutions perceived as  “too-big-to-fail”.

The Government  is proposing to introduce framework legislation for the regime along with  accompanying enhancements to Canada’s bank resolution toolkit. Regulations and  guidelines setting out further features of the regime will follow. This will  provide stakeholders with an additional opportunity to comment on elements of  the proposed regime.

Canada’s financial system performed well during the 2008 global financial crisis. Since that time, Canada has been an active participant in the G20’s financial sector reform agenda aimed at addressing the factors that contributed to the crisis. This includes international efforts to address the potential risks to the financial system and broader economy of institutions perceived as “too-big-to-fail”. Implementation of a bail-in regime for Canada’s domestic systemically important banks would strengthen our bank resolution toolkit so that it remains consistent with best practices of peer jurisdictions and international standards endorsed by the G20.

Studying Housing  and Household Indebtedness

Households rely on housing market data to make informed  decisions in buying and selling their homes, while governments depend on data  to design effective housing policies. Currently it is not possible to fully understand  the role of foreign homebuyers in Canada’s housing market since a comprehensive and reliable data set on the  number of homes sold to foreign homebuyers does not exist.

Budget 2016  proposes to address this data gap by allocating $500,000 to Statistics Canada  in 2016–17 to develop methods for gathering data on purchases of Canadian  housing by foreign homebuyers. This initiative could involve collaboration with  the provinces, such as British Columbia, which recently announced its intention  to have homebuyers disclose whether they are citizens or permanent  residents of Canada or another country.

Stable  and secure housing markets protect the greatest investment of many middle class  Canadian families. On December 11, 2015, the Government announced coordinated  actions to strengthen the resiliency of Canada’s housing finance system, increase  market discipline in residential lending, and promote long-term stability and  balanced economic growth. 1 The Government will continue to closely monitor vulnerabilities related to  housing and consumer debt and is prepared to implement further measures, should  they be needed.

Monitoring  Systemic Risks to the Financial System

The ability to monitor and respond to emerging systemic  risks and vulnerabilities in Canada’s financial system is critical to  promoting financial stability and economic growth.

In  December 2011, the Supreme Court of Canada found that Parliament has a role in  the management of systemic risks in Canada’s capital markets and Canada-wide  data collection. The Government intends to fulfil these responsibilities in a  manner that is collaborative and respectful of provincial and territorial  jurisdiction. A consultation draft of the proposed federal Capital Markets Stability Act was released for public comment in  September 2014. Based on the findings of this consultation, the Government will  release a revised draft of the proposed federal Capital Markets Stability Act by the summer.

The Government will also invest to enhance  the quality and timeliness of economic and financial data to support domestic  and international financial stability. Budget 2016 proposes $13.5 million  over five years, starting in 2016–17, to allow Statistics Canada to produce four new data products and fill  existing data gaps to meet the International Monetary Fund’s Special Data  Dissemination Standard Plus.

Supporting a  Robust Credit Union System Across Canada

The federal credit  union legislative framework provides an option for credit unions that seek to  grow regionally or nationally. Recognizing that credit unions considering the  federal framework may face transition challenges, the Government will propose  legislative measures to provide targeted protection against transitional risks  and facilitate a smooth entry process.

Enhancing the  Strong Regulatory and Supervisory Framework for Federally Regulated Pension  Plans

Budget 2016 proposes  changes to the agreement powers of the Pension  Benefits Standards Act (PBSA) and announces a consultative process on a  pension plan investment rule.

The Government  proposes to broaden the scope of its ability to enter into bilateral agreements  with provinces under the PBSA, which will better allow the federal and  provincial governments to work together to oversee certain pension plans.

The Government  aims to set out an efficient legislative and regulatory framework that provides  flexibility to pension plans to seek out the best investment opportunities,  while protecting the retirement savings of Canadians. To this end, the  Government will shortly launch a public consultation on the usefulness of the  investment rule that restricts pension plans from holding more than 30 per cent  of the voting shares of a company.

Ensuring the Ongoing  Effective Management of Canada’s Finances

Statutes supporting  the management of Canada’s finances and financial sector governance are  reviewed periodically to ensure they remain effective and up to date.

The Government will  review and may subsequently propose amendments to Part IV of the Financial Administration Act and related  statutes to ensure that they continue to support efficient management of  federal funds, as well as statutes relating to federal financial sector  oversight and certain Crown corporations to ensure effective governance and  operations.

1 The Minister of Finance  announced an increase to the minimum down payment from 5 per cent to  10 per cent for the portion of the property price above $500,000 for  government-backed insured mortgages effective February 15, 2016; Canada  Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC) announced an increase to guarantee fees  for CMHC-sponsored securitization programs effective July 1, 2016;  and the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions announced plans  to update regulatory capital requirements for residential mortgages.



<<< source: anx1-en.html >>>

Annex 1 – Details of Economic and Fiscal Projections

Economic Projections—Average Private    Sector Forecasts

The average of private sector economic    forecasts has been used as the basis for fiscal planning since 1994 and    introduces an element of independence into the Government’s fiscal forecast.    This practice has been supported by international organizations such as the    International Monetary Fund.

The Department of Finance regularly surveys private sector  economists on their views on the outlook for the Canadian economy. The economic  forecast presented in this section is based on a survey conducted in February  2016. 1

The February 2016 survey includes the views of 15 private  sector economists:

BMO Capital Markets,

Caisse  de dépôt et placement du Québec,

Canadian Federation of Independent Business,

CIBC World Markets,

The Conference Board of Canada,

Desjardins,

Deutsche Bank of Canada,

IHS Global Insight,

Industrial Alliance Insurance and Financial  Services Inc.,

Laurentian Bank Securities,

National Bank Financial Group,

Royal Bank of Canada,

Scotiabank,

TD Bank Financial Group, and

the University of Toronto (Policy and Economic  Analysis Program).

In the February 2016 survey,  private sector economists revised down the average outlook for real GDP and GDP  inflation for 2016 compared to the November 2015 Update of Economic and Fiscal Projections (2015 Fall Update),  reflecting impacts of sharp declines in crude oil prices since the 2015 Fall  Update and ongoing elevated uncertainty in the global economy. However, for  2017 and onward, the growth outlook is little changed from the 2015 Fall Update.

Private sector economists now expect real GDP growth of 1.4  per cent in 2016, lower than the 2.0 per cent in the 2015 Fall Update. Real GDP  growth in 2017 and beyond is, on average, unchanged from the 2015 Fall Update  (Table A1.1).

West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude oil prices continued to  fall over the end of 2015 and in the beginning of this year. The economists now  expect WTI crude oil prices to remain low at US$40 per barrel on average in  2016 and then to rise to US$63 per barrel by 2020. This compares to a rise from  US$54 to US$74, over the same period, in the 2015 Fall Update.

Low crude  oil prices have led the private sector economists to revise down their  expectations for GDP inflation (the broadest measure of economy-wide price  inflation) but only for 2016. The February survey forecasts GDP inflation of  1.0 per cent in 2016 (compared to 2.1 per cent in the 2015 Fall Update).

As a result of these developments, nominal GDP growth in the  February survey of private sector economists is expected to be 2.4 per cent in  2016 (compared with expectations of 4.2 per cent in the 2015 Fall Update).  Overall, the projected level of nominal GDP (the broadest single measure of the  tax base) in the February survey is lower by $27 billion per year, on average,  over the 2016–2020 period, compared to the 2015 Fall Update planning  assumption.

The economists have revised up their outlook for the  unemployment rate by 0.1 percentage points per year, on average, over the  2016–2020 period. They expect the unemployment rate to average 7.1 per cent in  2016 before falling to 6.3 per cent by 2020.

The outlook for Consumer Price Index inflation has been  revised down to 1.6 per cent in 2016 from the forecast of 2 per cent in  the 2015 Fall Update. Beyond 2016, the inflation rate is expected to remain at  around 2 per cent.

The economists have again revised down their expectations  for both short- and long-term interest rates by about 30 basis points over the  2016–2020 period relative to the 2015 Fall Update, reflecting  weaker-than-expected economic developments.

As noted in the introductory chapter, for fiscal planning  purposes, the private sector forecast for nominal GDP has been lowered by $40  billion per year for 2016 through 2020. This is roughly equivalent to reducing  the average private sector forecast for nominal GDP growth by 2.0 percentage  points in 2016. As a result, the projected level of nominal GDP for fiscal  planning purposes in Budget 2016 is lower by $67 billion per year, on average,  over the 2016–2020 period compared to the 2015 Fall Update planning assumption.

Fiscal Projections

Summary Statement of Transactions

Table A1.2 summarizes the Government’s projected financial  position over the forecast horizon. These projections are based on the average  private sector forecast for the economy discussed above, and factor in an  adjustment of $40 billion per year for 2016 through 2020 to the private  sector forecast for nominal GDP.

After accounting for Budget 2016 measures, the budgetary  balance is expected to show deficits of $5.4 billion in 2015–16 and $29.4  billion in 2016–17. Over the remainder of the forecast horizon, deficits are  expected to decline gradually from $29.0 billion in 2017–18 to $14.3 billion in  2020–21. The federal debt-to-GDP ratio is projected to decline beginning  in 2017–18 to the end of the fiscal horizon.

Outlook for Budgetary Revenues

Table A1.3 sets out the Government’s projection for  budgetary revenues. Overall,  budgetary revenues are expected to increase by 3.1 per cent in  2015–16. Revenues are projected to decline by 1.2 per cent in 2016–17 due to  the weaker economic outlook and a projected decrease in other revenues, before  growing by an average of 4.6 per cent per year from 2017–18 to 2020–21, in line  with the outlook for nominal GDP and interest rates. The decline in other  revenues in 2016–17 is primarily due to gains from asset sales in 2015–16 that are  not expected to recur.

Personal income tax revenues—the largest component of  budgetary revenues—are projected to increase by $6.9 billion, or 5.1 per cent,  to $142.7 billion in 2015–16. Over the remainder of the projection period,  personal income tax revenues are forecast to increase somewhat faster than  growth in nominal GDP, averaging 4.4 per cent annual growth,  reflecting personal income growth combined with the progressive nature of the  personal income tax system.

Corporate income tax revenues are projected to decline by  $0.6 billion, or 1.5 per cent, to $38.8 billion in 2015–16. This reflects the expectation  that despite strong revenue growth through January, low oil prices will have a significant negative impact on final  corporate income tax liabilities, particularly as corporations can carry back  losses to request refunds of taxes paid over the past three years. Any  remaining losses can also be carried forward against future tax liabilities,  which is expected to have a negative impact on revenues in future years. As a  result, corporate income tax revenues are projected to grow at an average  annual rate of 2.8 per cent over the remainder of the projection period.

Non-resident income tax revenues are income taxes paid by  non-residents on Canadian-sourced income, notably dividends and interest  payments. For 2015–16, non-resident income tax revenues are projected to  increase by $0.1 billion, or 1.7 per cent. Over the remainder of the projection  period, non-resident income tax revenues are projected to increase at an  average annual rate of 2.6 per cent.

Goods and Services Tax (GST) revenues are forecast to grow  by 5.6 per cent in 2015–16, based on projected growth in taxable  consumption and year-to-date results. Over the remainder of the projection  period, GST revenues are forecast to grow by 3.8 per cent per year on average,  based on projected growth in taxable consumption and in the Goods and Services  Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax Credit.

Customs  import duties are projected to increase by 13.2 per cent in 2015–16,  reflecting strong year-to-date overall import growth and the removal of  benefits for certain countries under Canada’s General Preferential Tariff  regime, effective January 1, 2015. Customs import duties are projected to  decrease slightly over the remainder of the projection period, mainly as a  result of the expected impacts of the ongoing implementation of the  Canada-Korea Free Trade Agreement, as well as the planned introduction of the  Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement and the  potential introduction of the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

Other excise taxes and duties are projected to increase by  2.4 per cent in
  2015–16, consistent with year-to-date results, and decline slightly thereafter,  due to lower projected excise taxes on tobacco and the expiry of the 2006  Canada-United States Softwood Lumber Agreement in October 2015. The expiration  of the Softwood Lumber Agreement has no impact on the budgetary balance as  export taxes collected under the agreement are a flow-through item with an  equal and offsetting impact on expenses.

Employment Insurance (EI) premium revenues are projected to  grow by 1.9 per cent in 2015–16, reflecting growth in insurable  earnings and the impact of the Small Business Job Credit. EI premium revenues  are projected to decline significantly in 2016–17 and 2017–18 following the  introduction of the seven-year break-even rate mechanism in 2017. Reflecting  the measures proposed in this budget, the break-even EI premium rate would be $1.61  in 2017, thereby ensuring that premium revenues are set equal to the projected  status quo EI program costs over the seven-year period starting that year.  The projected premium revenues do not take into consideration the Government’s  commitments to further improving Compassionate Care Benefits and parental leave  benefits.

The Employment  Insurance Operating Account operates within the Consolidated Revenue Fund. As  such, EI-related revenues and expenses are credited and charged to the Account,  respectively, in accordance with the Employment  Insurance Act . These revenues and expenses are consolidated with those of  the Government and impact the budgetary balance. For consistency with the EI  premium rate, which is set on a calendar-year basis, the annual and cumulative  balances of the Account are also presented on a calendar-year basis.

The EI Operating Account is  expected to record an annual surplus of $2.2 billion in 2015, returning the  Account to cumulative balance, consistent with the principle of breaking even  over time. With continued growth in EI premium revenues, an annual surplus is  also expected for 2016, before the EI premium rate is reduced to the seven-year  break-even rate of $1.61 in 2017.

Other revenues are made up of three broad components: Crown  corporation revenues from consolidated Crown corporations and net income from  enterprise Crown corporations; other program revenues from returns on  investments, proceeds from the sales of goods and services, and other  miscellaneous revenues; and foreign exchange revenues.

Crown corporation revenues tend to be volatile, owing  to the net gains or losses from enterprise Crown corporations and the impact of  returns on Crown borrowing. For example, in 2014–15, large fiscal gains were  realized on the transfer to Ontario of the province’s one-third share of the  Government’s holdings of General Motors common shares and on the repositioning  of the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation’s mortgage loan insurance  investment portfolio.

In 2015–16, Crown corporation revenues are projected to decline  by 3.1 per cent, despite significant gains that were realized on the sale  of the Government’s remaining holdings of General Motors common shares in April  2015. This is due to expected declines in net income for the Canada Mortgage  and Housing Corporation, Canada Post and Export Development Canada, which  reflect, in part, that revenues in the previous year were elevated due to  one-time events (e.g. gains on the repositioning of the Canada Mortgage and  Housing Corporation’s mortgage loan insurance investment portfolio). Crown  corporation revenues are projected to further decrease by 20.1 per cent in  2016–17, primarily as gains from the sale of shares in 2015–16 are not expected  to recur. From 2017–18 to 2020–21, these revenues are projected to grow at an  average annual rate of 6.8 per cent.

Other program revenues are affected by interest rate  movements, exchange rate movements (which affect the Canadian-dollar value  of foreign-denominated  assets) and flow-through items that give rise to an offsetting expense and  therefore do not impact the budgetary balance. These revenues were raised in  2014–15 by foreign exchange gains on loans and investments. For 2015–16, a  decline of 5.4 per cent is projected based on lower foreign exchange gains on  loans and investments and lower interest and penalty revenues. Over the  remainder of the projection period, other program revenues are projected to  increase at an average annual rate of 4.5 per cent.

Net foreign exchange revenues, which consist  mainly of returns on investments held in the Exchange Fund Account, are  volatile and sensitive to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and foreign  interest rates. These revenues were lowered by a large foreign exchange loss in  2014–15. As significant foreign exchange losses are not expected to recur,  2015–16 net foreign exchange revenues are expected to be $0.7 billion higher  than in 2014–15. Over the remainder of the projection period, net  foreign exchange revenues are projected to grow at an average annual rate of  8.5 per cent, reflecting projected increases in interest rates.

Outlook for  Program Expenses

Table A1.4 provides an overview of the projections for  program expenses by major component. Program expenses consist of major  transfers to persons, major transfers to other levels of government and  direct program expenses.

Major transfers to persons are projected to increase  from $83.1 billion in
  2015–16 to $104.0 billion in 2020–21. Major transfers to persons consist of  elderly, EI and children’s benefits.

Elderly benefits, which are comprised of Old Age Security,  Guaranteed Income Supplement and Allowance payments to qualifying seniors, are  projected to grow from $45.6 billion in 2015–16 to $60.1 billion in 2020–21, or  approximately 5.7 per cent per year—faster than nominal GDP, which is projected  to grow on average by 3.9 per cent per year. The expected increase in elderly  benefits is due to projected consumer price inflation, to which benefits are  fully indexed, and a projected increase in the seniors’ population as well as  the increase in the Guaranteed Income Supplement for single seniors announced  in this budget.

EI benefits are projected to increase by 7.4 per cent to $19.4  billion in 2015–16. This growth is in line with year-to-date results and  reflects the weakening of the labour market, particularly in oil-producing  provinces. Over the remainder of the projection period, EI benefits are  projected to grow moderately, averaging 2.7 per cent annually. This  is due to growth in average weekly benefits, including the EI measures  announced in this budget, being partially offset by a decline in the  number of regular beneficiaries, reflecting the expected improvement in the  labour market.

Children’s benefits are projected to rise from $18.1 billion  in 2015–16 to $21.8 billion in 2020–21, reflecting the new Canada Child  Benefit, which will replace the Canada Child Tax Benefit and the Universal  Child Care Benefit as of July 2016.

Major transfers to other levels of government, which include  the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the Canada Social Transfer (CST),  Equalization, Territorial Formula Financing and the Gas Tax Fund, among others,  are expected to increase over the forecast horizon, from $65.8 billion in  2015–16 to $78.1 billion in 2020–21.

The CHT is projected to grow from $34.0 billion in 2015–16  to $41.9 billion in 2020–21. In 2016–17, the CHT is legislated to grow by 6.0  per cent. Starting in 2017–18, the CHT will grow in line with a three-year  moving average of nominal GDP growth, with funding guaranteed to increase by at  least 3.0 per cent per year.

The CST is legislated to grow at 3.0 per cent per year,  increasing from $13.0 billion in 2015–16 to $15.0 billion in 2020–21.

The Gas Tax Fund is projected to grow from $2.0 billion in 2015–16  to $2.2 billion in 2020–21 as these payments are indexed at 2.0 per cent  per year, with increases applied in $100 million increments.

Direct program expenses are projected to rise to $122.0  billion in 2015–16 and further to $141.1 billion in 2020–21, largely as a  result of measures announced in this budget. Direct program expenses include  operating expenses, transfer payments administered by departments and  capital amortization.

The projected increase in direct program expenses is driven  by an increase in transfer payments administered by departments, including  transfers to provincial, municipal and Aboriginal governments and  post-secondary institutions for investment in infrastructure, as well as  funding for education. Overall, transfer payments are projected to increase  from $34.1 billion in  2015–16 to $46.0 billion in 2020–21.

Operating expenses reflect the cost of doing business for  more than 100 government departments and agencies. Operating expenses are  projected to increase from $82.8 billion in 2015–16 to $88.7 billion  in 2020–21 due in part to measures announced in Budget 2016, including enhanced  benefits for veterans.

Capital amortization is expected to increase from $5.2  billion in 2015–16 to $6.5 billion in 2020–21 as a result of recent and  planned investments and upgrades to existing federal capital.

Public debt charges  are projected to increase from $25.7 billion in 2015–16 to $35.5 billion in  2020–21, due to a projected rise in interest rates over the forecast horizon  and a higher anticipated stock of interest-bearing debt, reflecting an increase  in borrowing requirements.

Starting with Budget  2016, Canadians will see real investments made in their communities. Immediate  investments that will create jobs and support clean growth across the country.

Phase 1 of the  Government’s infrastructure plan proposes to provide $11.9 billion over  five years, starting right away. Budget 2016 puts this plan into action  with an immediate down payment on this plan, including:

$3.4 billion over three years to upgrade and improve  public transit systems across Canada;

$5.0 billion over five years for investments in water,  wastewater and green infrastructure projects across Canada; and

$3.4 billion over five years for social  infrastructure, including affordable housing, early learning and child care,  cultural and recreational infrastructure, and community health care facilities  on reserve. 2

The Government will  also continue to make available approximately $3 billion each year in dedicated  funding for municipal infrastructure projects through the Gas Tax Fund and the  incremental Goods and Services Tax Rebate for Municipalities.

In addition, the  Government will provide a record high of $70.9 billion  in 2016–17 in transfer payments to provinces and territories to help fund  essential public services such as health care, post-secondary education,  programs for children, social assistance and other social programs, and to  reduce fiscal disparities among jurisdictions. This is an increase of  $2.9 billion or 4.3 per cent relative to 2015–16. Major  transfers to provinces and territories will continue to grow in a sustainable  manner moving forward.

The Canada Health Transfer  will increase to $36.1 billion, the Canada Social Transfer to  $13.3 billion, Equalization to $17.9 billion and Territorial Formula  Financing to $3.6 billion in 2016–17. The amounts to be transferred  to each jurisdiction are shown in the table below.

Fiscal Stabilization Payments to Alberta  and Newfoundland and Labrador

The Government  appreciates the difficulties faced by provinces due to the sharp decline in  crude oil prices. Some provinces have felt this drop more acutely than others.  As part of ongoing support to provincial and territorial governments to assist  them in the provision of programs and services, the Government is providing advance  fiscal stabilization payments of $251.4 million to Alberta and $31.7 million to  Newfoundland and Labrador with respect to 2015–16.

Measures  to Improve Territorial Formula Financing

In response to concerns expressed by the  territorial governments, Budget 2016 proposes to introduce measures to improve  Territorial Formula Financing. Transfers to territories were set to decline by  $25 million in 2016–17, largely as a result of a revision to the public sector  data within Statistics Canada’s Macroeconomic Accounts. The Government will  introduce legislative amendments to improve the stability and predictability of  federal Territorial Formula Financing payments and address the impact of this  recent data revision. These amendments will enable the Government to recalculate  the Territorial Formula Financing payments to territories for 2016–17, which  will provide an additional $67 million to the territories in 2016–17 compared  to the amounts calculated in December 2015.

The Government is committed  to ongoing engagement with provincial and territorial governments and with  Canadians to work together to address our economic and fiscal challenges. As we  approach the 2019 renewal of the Equalization and Territorial Formula Financing  programs, federal, provincial and territorial officials will continue their  collaborative efforts to improve these programs.

Financial Source/Requirement

The budgetary balance is presented on a full accrual basis  of accounting, recording government revenues and expenses when they are earned  or incurred, regardless of when the cash is received or paid.

In contrast, the financial source/requirement measures the  difference between cash coming in to the Government and cash going out. This  measure is affected not only by the budgetary balance but also by the  Government’s non-budgetary transactions. These include changes in federal  employee pension liabilities; changes in non-financial assets; investing  activities through loans, investments and advances; and changes in other  financial assets and liabilities, including foreign exchange activities.

As shown  in Table A1.5, a financial requirement is projected over the entire forecast  period. The projected financial requirements for 2015–16 to 2020–21 largely  reflect requirements associated with the budgetary balance, increases in retained  earnings of enterprise Crown corporations and growth in other assets, including  financing of the Exchange Fund Account.

A financial source is projected for pensions and other  accounts for 2015–16 to 2019–20. Pensions and other accounts include the activities  of the Government of Canada’s employee pension plans and those of federally  appointed judges and Members of Parliament, as well as a variety of other  employee future benefit plans, such as health care and dental plans and  disability and other benefits for war veterans and others. The financial source  for pensions and other accounts largely reflects adjustments for pension and  benefit expenses not funded in the period.

Financial requirements for non-financial assets mainly  reflect the difference between cash outlays for the acquisition of new tangible  capital assets and the amortization of capital assets included in the budgetary  balance. They also include disposals of tangible capital assets and changes in  inventories and prepaid expenses. A net cash requirement of $2.4 billion is  estimated for 2016–17.

Loans, investments and advances include the Government’s  investments in enterprise Crown corporations, such as Canada Mortgage and  Housing Corporation (CMHC), Export Development Canada (EDC), the Business  Development Bank of Canada (BDC) and Farm Credit Canada (FCC). They also include  loans, investments and advances to national and provincial governments and  international organizations, and for government programs. The requirements for  enterprise Crown corporations projected from 2015–16 to 2020–21 reflect  retained earnings of enterprise Crown corporations as well as the Government’s  decision in Budget 2007 to meet all the borrowing needs of CMHC, BDC and FCC  through its own domestic debt issuance. In general, loans, investments and  advances are expected to generate additional revenues for the Government in the  form of interest or additional net profits of enterprise Crown corporations,  which partly offset debt charges associated with these borrowing requirements.  These revenues are reflected in projections of the budgetary balance.

Other  transactions include the payment of tax refunds and other accounts payable, the  collection of taxes and other accounts receivable, the conversion of other  accrual adjustments included in the budgetary balance into cash, as well as  foreign exchange activities. Projected cash requirements associated with other  transactions mainly reflect forecast increases in the Government’s official  international reserves held in the Exchange Fund Account, as per the prudential  liquidity plan, as well as projected growth in accounts receivable, in line  with historical trends.

Sensitivity  of the Budgetary Balance to Economic Shocks

Risks associated with the economic outlook are the greatest  source of uncertainty for fiscal projections.  To help quantify these risks in respect of their impact on the fiscal  outlook, tables illustrating the sensitivity  of the budgetary balance to a number of economic shocks are provided  below.

Changes in economic assumptions affect the projections for  revenues and expenses. The following tables illustrate the sensitivity of  the budgetary balance to a number of economic shocks:

A one-year, 1-percentage-point decrease in real  GDP growth driven equally by lower productivity and employment growth.

A decrease in nominal GDP growth resulting  solely from a one-year, 1‑percentage-point decrease in the rate of GDP  inflation (assuming that the Consumer Price Index moves in line with GDP  inflation).

A sustained 100-basis-point increase in all  interest rates.

These sensitivities are generalized rules of thumb that  assume any decrease in economic activity is proportional across income and  expenditure components,  and are meant to provide a broad illustration of the impact of economic shocks  on the outlook for the budgetary balance. Actual economic shocks may have  different fiscal impacts. For example, they may be concentrated in specific  sectors of the economy or cause different responses in key economic variables  (e.g. GDP inflation and Consumer Price Index inflation may have different  responses), or they may interact with particular provisions of the tax system  (e.g. loss carrybacks and carryforwards).

A 1-percentage-point decrease in real GDP growth  proportional across income and expenditure components reduces the budgetary  balance by $5.0 billion in the first year, $5.2 billion in the  second year and $5.1 billion in the fifth year (Table A1.6).

Tax revenues from all sources fall by a total of  $4.0 billion in the first year and by $4.0 billion in the second  year. Personal income tax revenues decrease as employment and the underlying  tax base fall. Corporate income tax revenues fall as output and profits  decrease. GST revenues decrease as a result of lower consumer spending  associated with the fall in employment and personal income.

EI premium revenues decrease as employment and  wages and salaries fall. In order to isolate the direct impact of the  economic shock and provide a general overview of the fiscal impacts, the  EI premium revenue impacts do not include changes in the premium rate.

Expenses rise, mainly reflecting higher EI  benefits (due to an increase in the number of unemployed) and higher public  debt charges (reflecting a higher stock of debt due to the lower budgetary  balance). This rise is partially offset by lower other program expenses  (as certain programs are linked to growth in nominal GDP).

A 1-percentage-point decrease in nominal GDP growth  proportional across income and expenditure components resulting solely from  lower GDP inflation (assuming that the Consumer Price Index moves in line with  GDP inflation) lowers the budgetary balance by $2.2 billion in the  first year, $1.8 billion in the second year and $1.0 billion in the  fifth year (Table A1.7).

Lower prices result in lower nominal income and,  as a result, personal income tax revenues decrease, reflecting declines in the  underlying nominal tax base. As the parameters of the personal income tax  system are indexed to inflation and automatically adjust in response to  the shock, the fiscal impact is smaller than under the real shock. For the  other sources of tax revenue, the negative impacts are similar under the real  and nominal GDP shocks.

EI premium revenues decrease in response to  lower earnings. In order to isolate the direct impact of the economic shock and  provide a general overview of the fiscal impacts, the EI premium revenue  impacts do not include changes in the premium rate.

Other revenues decline slightly as lower prices  lead to lower revenues from the sales of goods and services.

Partly offsetting lower revenues are the  declines in the cost of statutory programs that are indexed to inflation, such  as elderly benefit payments, and downward pressure on federal program expenses.  Payments under these programs are smaller if inflation is lower. In addition,  other program expenses are also lower as certain programs are linked to growth  in nominal GDP or the Consumer Price Index.

Public debt charges decline in the first year  due to lower costs associated with Real Return Bonds, then rise due to the higher  stock of debt.

An increase in interest rates decreases the budgetary  balance by $0.9 billion in the first year, $1.9 billion in the second  year and $3.3 billion in the fifth year (Table A1.8). The decline stems  entirely from increased expenses associated with public debt charges. The impact on debt charges  rises through time as longer-term debt matures and is refinanced at higher  rates. Moderating the overall impact is an increase in revenues associated with  the increase in the rate of return on the Government’s interest-bearing assets,  which are recorded as part of other revenues. The impacts of changes in  interest rates on public sector pension and benefit expenses are excluded from  the sensitivity analysis.

1 The February survey has not  been adjusted to reflect the release of the Canadian Economic Accounts for the  fourth quarter of 2015 on March 1st. However, the level of nominal  GDP in the fourth quarter came in as projected in the February 2016 survey of  private sector economists, and thus the fourth quarter data have no  implications for the economic and fiscal projections (which are based on the  February 2016 survey) presented in this budget.

2 Numbers may not add due  to rounding.



<<< source: anx2-en.html >>>

Annex 2 – Economic Impacts of Budget  Measures

There are two primary channels    through which government spending can affect output and employment. First,    governments can invest in infrastructure or purchase goods and services,    which translates into an immediate, dollar-for-dollar increase in final    domestic expenditure. Second, governments can induce spending increases by    households and businesses through tax measures or transfers. However, the extent    to which these measures boost domestic expenditure and production will be    determined by changes in saving and imports.

For example, while a  reduction in personal income taxes results in a dollar-for-dollar increase in  household disposable income, it does not immediately translate into higher  spending. Households may choose to save some of this additional income,  particularly in the short run, with higher-income households saving  relatively more and lower-income households saving relatively less. 1

For any given increase in expenditure, the impact on  domestic production will depend on the proportion of goods and services that  will be imported, as some spending and investment by households, businesses or  governments "leaks" out of the Canadian economy to foreign producers. For  example, approximately one-half of all consumer durable goods are imported,  compared to about one-quarter for non-durable consumer goods (such as food and  energy).

For these reasons, the impact on domestic output and  employment from most types of fiscal measures tends to be relatively small in  the short run. Over time, however, new spending stimulates employment growth,  which in turn yields a further boost to real GDP.

Estimating  Economic Impacts

To estimate the economic impacts of the measures presented  in this budget, they were allocated into the following categories, which  correspond to those used in the Department of Finance's macroeconomic and  fiscal model: housing investment (including new home construction and  renovations), infrastructure investment, personal income tax and transfer  measures, measures for modest- and low-income households (including changes to  Employment Insurance and other transfers to low-income households), other  government spending measures (such as government support for research, training  and innovation) and corporate income tax measures.

Each of these categories has a different multiplier.  Multipliers are summary measures that take into account the channels from  measures to economic activity, including direct, indirect and induced impacts,  and leakages to saving and imports. For example, the multiplier on government  infrastructure investment includes the positive impacts of the direct activity  (for example, construction sector output), indirect impacts (domestic firms providing inputs to the construction  sector) and induced activity (increased household spending resulting from the  higher employment and income). A multiplier of 1 means that one dollar in  budgetary expenditure generates one dollar in real output.

Multipliers will vary by type of measure, for example  reflecting the degree to which households save tax reductions rather than spend  them, or the import content of goods and services purchased as a result of  higher infrastructure expenditures. Further, as indirect and induced impacts  take time to materialize, multipliers are initially smaller but grow over time,  as new spending stimulates employment growth, which in turn yields a further  boost to economic output.

As shown  in Table A2.1 below, the short-term multipliers for infrastructure and housing  investment are relatively high, reflecting smaller leakages to saving or  imports. In contrast, a reduction in corporate income taxes has a considerably  lower multiplier in the short run (meaning it has a relatively low short-term  impact on real GDP), as it takes time for firms to invest and  accumulate capital. 1

Table A2.2 below summarizes the value of the measures  presented in this budget, as well as that of the middle class tax cut announced  in December 2015, mapped to the categories presented above (see Table A2.4 at  the end of this annex for additional details).

Economic Impacts

Based on the above estimated multipliers, these measures are expected to  raise the level of real GDP by 0.5 per cent in the first year and  by 1.0 per cent by the second year (Table A2.3). This is expected to  translate into 100,000 jobs created or maintained by 2017–18. 2 Of  note, most private sector forecasters anticipated additional government  measures to promote growth to be announced in this budget, and therefore the  February private sector survey to some extent incorporates the forecasters'  estimates of the economic impact.

It should be noted that there is  some uncertainty, and debate, surrounding the size of fiscal multipliers.  However, recent economic research suggests that fiscal multipliers are larger  when resources in the economy are underutilized 3 and when the policy interest rate is close to its effective lower bound. 4

In other words, in times of  relatively weak economic growth, government investment is likely to have a  larger impact, as it does not simply displace private investment or push up  interest rates. Indeed, some research shows that multipliers can be very high  when these conditions prevail, reaching between 3 and 4 5 for overall government spending. With both of these conditions present in  Canada, the above noted multipliers, and resulting GDP impacts, are appropriate  and prudent.

1 However, corporate income  tax measures have among the highest multipliers over the long run, as higher  investment eventually leads to higher permanent capacity to produce goods and  services.

2 This analysis assumes  that a 1-per-cent increase in real GDP translates into an immediate  0.2-per-cent increase in employment, rising to about 0.6 per cent after eight  quarters. This ratio is consistent with the historical relationship between  growth in employment and real GDP in Canada.

3 Owyang,  Michael T., Valerie A. Ramey, and Sarah Zubairy, 2013. "Are Government Spending  Multipliers Greater During Times of Slack? Evidence from 20th Century  Historical Data." American Economic Review 102(2):51-102.

4 Batini,  Nicoletta, Luc Eyraud, and Anke Weber, 2014. "A Simple Method to Compute Fiscal  Multipliers." IMF Working Paper WP/14/93.

5 Christiano,  Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2011. "When Is the Government  Spending Multiplier Large?" Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119, No. 1, pp.  78-121.

6 Higher savings does not  lead to higher investment in the short run, but over time it leads to higher  capital accumulation and therefore to a higher sustainable level of output.



<<< source: anx3-en.html >>>

Annex 3 -
Debt Management Strategy for 2016–17

Purpose

The Debt Management Strategy presents the Government of Canada’s plans for the management of its domestic and foreign debt, other financial liabilities and related assets in 2016–17. The borrowing activities covered by the Strategy include the refinancing of government debt coming to maturity, the execution of the budget plan and the ongoing financial operations of the Government. This includes borrowing on behalf of certain Crown corporations.

The Financial Administration Act requires that the Government table in Parliament, prior to the start of the fiscal year, a report on the anticipated borrowing to be undertaken in the year ahead, including the purposes for which the money will be borrowed. The Debt Management Strategy fulfills this requirement.

Planned Borrowing Activities for 2016–17

Borrowing Authority

The Financial Administration Act provides the authority for the Government to conduct market borrowings subject to approval by the Governor in Council.

In 2016–17, the Government will propose legislative amendments to require Parliamentary approval of Government borrowing to enhance transparency and accountability to Parliament.

The expected sources and uses of borrowings are set out below. Actual borrowings and uses of funds compared with the forecast will be reported in the 2016–17 Debt Management Report , and detailed information on outcomes will be provided in the 2017 Public Accounts of Canada .

Sources of Borrowings

The aggregate principal amount of money to be borrowed by the Government from financial markets in 2016–17 is projected to be $278 billion.

Uses of Borrowings

Refinancing needs, projected to be $241 billion during the year, are mainly comprised of $136 billion for maturing treasury bills and $92 billion for maturing bonds.

The other determinant of borrowing needs is the Government’s financial source/requirement. If the Government has a financial source, it can use the source for some of its refinancing needs. If it has a financial requirement, then it must meet that requirement along with its refinancing needs.

The financial source/requirement measures the difference between cash coming into the Government and cash going out. This measure is affected not only by the budgetary balance but also by the Government’s non-budgetary transactions.

Non-budgetary transactions include changes in federal employee pension accounts; changes in non-financial assets; investing activities through loans, investments and advances (including loans to three Crown corporations—the Business Development Bank of Canada, Farm Credit Canada and Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation); and other transactions (e.g., changes in other financial assets and liabilities, and foreign exchange activities).

For 2016–17, a financial requirement of approximately $37 billion is projected. As the amount the Government plans to borrow is equivalent to the borrowing requirements, the year-end cash position is not projected to change (Table A3.1).

Actual borrowings for the year may differ from the forecast due to uncertainty associated with economic and fiscal projections, the timing of cash transactions, and other factors such as changes in foreign reserve needs and Crown borrowings.

Debt Management Strategy for 2016–17

Objectives

The fundamental objective of debt management is to raise stable and low-cost funding to meet the financial needs of the Government of Canada. Achieving stable low-cost funding involves striking a balance between the cost and the risk associated with the debt structure as funding needs change and under various market conditions.

An associated objective is to maintain a well-functioning market in Government of Canada securities, which helps to keep debt costs low and stable. Having access to a well-functioning government securities market ensures that funding can be raised efficiently over time to meet the Government’s needs. To support a liquid and well-functioning Government of Canada securities market, the Government strives to promote transparency and regularity.

Increasing Bond Issuance

The Government is increasing issuance in all existing nominal bond sectors, including the 2- and 5-year sectors, and also re-introducing the 3-year sector for 2016–17. This approach considers the liquidity needs of the market for core existing sectors while ensuring the Government has access to an additional sector.

Market Consultations

As in previous years, market participants were consulted in 2015–16 as part of the process of developing the debt management strategy.

Overall, market participants indicated that liquidity in Government of Canada securities has declined relative to previous years, particularly but not exclusively in off-the-run (non-benchmark) bonds. Market participants expressed the importance of maintaining a bond program that has large liquid benchmarks for key sectors, particularly the 2-year and 5-year sectors, and a minimum stock of treasury bills to support market well-functioning.

Debt Structure Planning

The Debt Management Strategy for 2016–17 is informed by analysis that reflects a wide range of economic and interest rate scenarios and forecasts for the debt structure over a medium-term horizon.

Specifically, the Government seeks to strike a balance between keeping funding costs low and mitigating risks, as measured by metrics such as debt rollover, the variation in annual debt-service charges and the variation in the annual budgetary balance. Consequently, the debt strategy, while increasing issuance in all nominal bond sectors, has an increased focus on the issuance of short- and medium-term bonds (2-, 3- and 5-year maturities).

Over the next decade the share of bonds with original terms of 10 years or more is projected to remain around 40 per cent, with the level of refinancing risk of domestic market debt projected to decline over the medium term. The net annual refinancing amount of domestic market debt as a percentage of gross domestic product (GDP), which measures the amount of all domestic market debt that matures within one year relative to Canada’s GDP, is projected to decline from about 8 per cent in 2016–17 to under 6 per cent over the coming decade.

The average term to maturity of domestic market debt, net of financial assets, is projected to remain relatively stable at around 7 to 7.5 years over the medium term.

Composition of Market Debt

Total market debt is projected to reach $706 billion by the end of 2016–17 (Table A3.2).

The treasury bill stock is not projected to change materially by the end of the fiscal year. This will serve to reduce overall refinancing and rollover risk for the market debt portfolio, while taking advantage of historically low interest rates to continue to achieve low funding costs.

Bond Program

In 2016–17, gross bond issuance is expected to be $133 billion, representing an increase of about $41 billion from 2015–16 levels (Table A3.3).

Given the strong demand for long-term bonds and with long-term yields remaining well below their historical average, the Government may consider issuing additional 50-year bonds in 2016–17. Any decision to reopen the 50-year bond would be subject to favourable market conditions. Consultations were undertaken in 2015 on auctions of 50-year bonds and this is an option that could be used by the Government.

Maturity Dates and Benchmark Bond Target Range Sizes

For 2016–17, no changes to the bond maturity pattern are planned, while benchmark target range sizes are increasing for the 2-, 5- and 10-year sectors.

The maturity date pattern and benchmark size range for the 3-year bond sector will be made public following discussions with market participants in the first quarter of the fiscal year.

Bond Auction Schedule

In 2016–17, there will be quarterly auctions of 2-, 3-, 5- and 10-year bonds and Real Return Bonds. 1 Five 10-year bond auctions will occur—two in the first quarter of 2016–17 and one in each of the remaining quarters of 2016–17. Two 30-year nominal bond auctions will occur—one in each of the first and third quarters of 2016–17.

The order of bond auctions within each quarter may be adjusted to support the borrowing program, and there may be multiple auctions of the same bonds in some quarters. The dates of each auction will continue to be announced through the Quarterly Bond Schedule that is published on the Bank of Canada website prior to the start of each quarter.

Bond Buyback Programs

Two types of bond buyback operations are conducted from time to time: regular bond buybacks on a switch basis and cash management bond buybacks.

Buyback operations on a switch basis may be continued in the 30-year sector. However, no regular buyback operations on a cash basis are expected for
 2016–17.

Weekly cash management bond buyback operations will be continued in
 2016–17. The cash management bond buyback program helps to manage government cash requirements by reducing the high levels of cash balances needed ahead of large bond maturities.

Treasury Bill Program

Over the course of 2016–17, the share of treasury bills is projected to decline to just under 20 per cent of domestic market debt. This decline is consistent with the medium-term objective of reducing the treasury bill target share to around 20 per cent to contain debt rollover and maintain issuance stability in the bond program.

In accordance with this objective, the stock of treasury bills is projected to decline slightly, moving from $136 billion at the start of this fiscal year to about $134 billion by the end of 2016–17.

Bi-weekly issuance of 3-, 6- and 12-month maturities will be continued in
 2016–17, with bi-weekly auction sizes projected to be largely in the $8 billion to $14 billion range. Cash management bills (i.e., short-dated treasury bills) help manage government cash requirements in an efficient manner. These instruments will also continue to be used in 2016–17.

Retail Debt

Over 2 million Canadians hold Canada Savings Bonds (CSBs) or Canada Premium Bonds (CPBs). CSBs are offered exclusively through the Payroll Savings Program while CPBs are available for sale through financial institutions and dealers, as well as directly by phone. Further information on the retail debt program is available on the Canada Savings Bonds website .

Foreign Currency Funding

The Exchange Fund Account (EFA) aids in the control and protection of the external value of the Canadian dollar, and provides a source of liquidity to the Government. The Government borrows in foreign currencies to invest in EFA assets. Liquid foreign exchange reserves are maintained at a level at or above 3 per cent of nominal GDP, and the Debt Management Strategy assumes that all foreign liabilities maturing during the year will be refinanced. Foreign currency funding requirements for 2016–17 are estimated to be around US$10 billion, but may vary as a result of movements in foreign interest and exchange rates.

The mix of funding sources used to finance the reserves in 2016–17 will depend on a number of considerations, including relative cost, market conditions and the objective of maintaining a prudent foreign-currency-denominated debt maturity structure. Potential funding sources include a short-term US-dollar paper program (Canada bills), medium-term notes, international bond issues (global bonds), purchases and sales of Canadian dollars in foreign exchange markets, and cross-currency swaps involving the exchange of domestic liabilities for foreign-currency-denominated liabilities.

Further information on foreign currency funding and the foreign reserve assets is available in the Report on the Management of Canada’s Official International Reserves and in The Fiscal Monitor .

Cash Management

The core objective of cash management is to ensure that the Government has sufficient cash available at all times to meet its operating requirements.

Cash consists of moneys on deposit with the Bank of Canada, chartered banks and other financial institutions. Cash with the Bank of Canada includes operational balances and balances held for prudential liquidity. Cash balances are projected to remain stable at $36 billion at the end of the fiscal year. Periodic updates on the liquidity position are available in The Fiscal Monitor .

Prudential Liquidity

The Government holds liquid financial assets in the form of domestic cash deposits and foreign exchange reserves to safeguard its ability to meet payment obligations in situations where normal access to funding markets may be disrupted or delayed. The Government’s overall liquidity levels cover at least one month of net projected cash flows, including coupon payments and debt refinancing needs.

Prudent Management of Canada’s Finances

In 2016–17, the Government will review the Financial Administration Act and related statutes to ensure that they continue to reflect and accommodate modern market practices for the prudent management of Canada’s finances.

1 Quarterly auctions of 3-year bonds will start no earlier than the second quarter of the fiscal year.



<<< source: toc-tdm-en_2.html >>>

Tax Measures: Table of Contents

Supplementary Information

Overview

Personal Income Tax Measures

Canada Child Benefit Income Splitting  Credit Northern Residents  Deductions Labour-Sponsored Venture  Capital Corporations Tax Credit Teacher and Early  Childhood Educator School Supply Tax Credit Ontario Electricity  Support Program Mineral Exploration  Tax Credit for Flow-Through Share Investors Education and  Textbook Tax Credits Children’s Fitness  and Arts Tax Credits Top Marginal Income  Tax Rate – Consequential Amendments Taxation of Switch  Fund Shares Sales of Linked  Notes

Business Income Tax Measures

Expanding Tax  Support for Clean Energy Electric Vehicle  Charging Stations Electrical Energy  Storage Emissions Trading  Regimes Small Business  Taxation Small Business Tax  Rate Multiplication of  the Small Business Deduction Avoidance of the  Business Limit and the Taxable Capital Limit Consultation on  Active versus Investment Business Life Insurance  Policies Debt Parking to  Avoid Foreign Exchange Gains Valuation for  Derivatives Eligible Capital  Property Back-to-Back Loan  Rules: Shareholder Loans

International Tax Measures

Base Erosion and  Profit Shifting Cross-Border Surplus  Stripping Extension of the  Back-to-Back Rules

Sales and  Excise Tax Measures

Health Measures Exported Call Centre Services Reporting of  Grandparented Housing Sales GST/HST on Donations  to Charities De Minimis Financial  Institutions Application of  GST/HST to Cross-Border Reinsurance Closely Related Test Restricting the  Relief of Excise Tax on Diesel and Aviation Fuel Enhancing Certain  Security and Collection Provisions in the Excise Act, 2001

Other Measures

Aboriginal Tax  Policy

Status of Outstanding Tax Measures

Notice of Ways and Means Motions

Notice of Ways and  Means Motion to amend the Income Tax Act and Other Tax Legislation Notice of Ways and  Means Motion to amend the Excise Tax Act Notice of Ways and  Means Motion to amend the Excise Tax Act, the Excise Act, 2001 and Other Tax  Legislation

Draft Amendments to Various GST/HST Regulations

Explanatory Notes – Eligible Capital Property



<<< source: si-rs-en.html >>>

Tax Measures: Supplementary Information

Overview

This volume provides detailed information  on each of the tax measures proposed in Budget 2016.

Table 1 lists these measures and provides  estimates of their budgetary impact.

The volume also includes the Notices of  Ways and Means Motions to amend the Income  Tax Act , the Excise Tax Act , the Excise Act, 2001 and other tax legislation,  draft amendments to various GST/HST regulations and explanatory notes in  respect of draft legislative proposals relating to eligible capital property.

References to “Budget Day” are to be read  as references to the day on which Budget 2016 is presented.

Personal Income  Tax Measures

Canada Child  Benefit

There are currently two main federal  instruments for the provision of financial assistance to families with children  under age 18: the Canada child tax benefit (CCTB) and the universal child care  benefit (UCCB).

The CCTB is a non-taxable benefit that is  paid monthly, based on adjusted family net income and the number of children in  the family. The CCTB has three components (amounts shown are for the 2016-17  benefit year):

a CCTB base benefit for low-  and middle-income families, of up to $1,490 each for the first and second  child and $1,594 for the third and each subsequent child;

a national child benefit  supplement for low-income families of up to $2,308 for a first child,  $2,042 for a second child and $1,943 for each subsequent child; and

a child disability benefit of  up to $2,730, provided to families caring for a child under age 18 who is eligible  for the disability tax credit.

The UCCB provides  a taxable benefit of $160 per month for each child under the age of six and $60 per month for each child aged 6 through 17.

To simplify and consolidate  existing child benefits while ensuring that help is better targeted to those  who need it most, Budget 2016 proposes to replace the CCTB and UCCB with a new  Canada Child Benefit.

The Canada Child Benefit will provide a  maximum benefit of $6,400 per child under the age of 6 and $5,400 per child aged  6 through 17. On the portion of adjusted family net income between $30,000 and  $65,000, the benefit will be phased out at a rate of 7 per cent for a one-child  family, 13.5 per cent for a two-child family, 19 per cent for a three-child  family and 23 per cent for larger families. Where adjusted family net income exceeds  $65,000, remaining benefits will be phased out at rates of 3.2 per cent for a  one-child family, 5.7 per cent for a two-child family, 8 per cent for a  three-child family and 9.5 per cent for larger families, on the portion of  income above $65,000.

To recognize the additional costs of caring  for a child with a severe disability, Budget 2016 proposes to continue to  provide an additional amount of up to $2,730 per child eligible for the disability  tax credit. The phase-out of this additional amount will be made to generally  align with the Canada Child Benefit. Specifically, it will be phased out  at a rate of 3.2 per cent for families with one eligible child and 5.7 per cent  for families with more than one eligible child, on adjusted family net income  in excess of $65,000, effective July 1, 2016. This additional amount will be  included in the Canada Child Benefit payments made to eligible families.

Entitlement to the Canada Child Benefit for  the July 2016 to June 2017 benefit year will be based on adjusted family net  income for the 2015 taxation year.

Budget 2016 proposes two specific changes  that would take effect with the introduction of the Canada Child Benefit.

Eligibility  of foreign-born individuals who are Indians under the Indian Act

Foreign-born individuals who are Indians  under the Indian Act and who are not  Canadian citizens, or permanent residents under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act ,may legally reside in Canada and be entitled to certain programs  and services offered by federal and provincial governments (such as the goods  and services tax credit, working income tax benefit, old age security and employment  insurance).

Budget 2016 proposes to ensure that all individuals  who are Indians under the Indian Act and residents of Canada for tax purposes are eligible to receive the Canada  Child Benefit where all other eligibility requirements are met.

Retroactive Payments

Currently, an individual can apply to receive  retroactive payments of the CCTB and UCCB as far back as when the programs were  introduced, provided they would have been eligible to receive the benefits at  the time.

In contrast, a taxpayer who has not claimed, on a previous tax  return, tax credits or benefits to which they would otherwise have been  entitled (such as the goods and services tax credit, working income tax benefit  or disability tax credit) may request a tax reassessment in respect of a  taxation year up to 10 calendar years after the end of that taxation year, in  order to receive retroactive payment of these amounts.

To be consistent with the time limit on  retroactive claims of other tax amounts, Budget 2016 proposes to allow a  taxpayer to request a retroactive payment of the Canada Child Benefit, CCTB or  UCCB in respect of a month on or before the day that is 10 years after the  beginning of that month, effective for requests made after June 2016.

In other respects, the rules governing  the Canada Child Benefit will generally be based on those which apply to the  CCTB. For example,

The Canada Child Benefit will  be paid monthly to eligible families.

Amounts received under the new  Canada Child Benefit will not be taxable and will not reduce benefits paid  under the goods and services tax credit. They will also not be included in  income for the purposes of federal income-tested programs delivered outside of  the income tax system, such as the Guaranteed Income Supplement, the Canada  education savings grant, the Canada learning bond, the Canada disability  savings bond and the Canada disability savings grant.

To be eligible for the Canada  Child Benefit, an individual must be a resident of Canada for tax purposes and  must reside with the qualified dependant and be the parent who primarily  fulfils the responsibility for the care and upbringing of the qualified  dependant or be a shared-custody parent.

Children’s  Special Allowance

The children’s special allowance is  generally paid to provincial and territorial child protection agencies to  assist with the costs of caring for a child under the care of a child  protection agency. The current allowance is equivalent to the maximum benefit  under the existing CCTB and UCCB system.

To ensure consistent treatment for children  under the care of a child protection agency, Budget 2016 proposes to increase  the children’s special allowance to the same level as is proposed under the  Canada Child Benefit, effective July 1, 2016.

Timing of the  Changes to Child Benefits

Canada  Child Benefit payments under this measure will start in July 2016. The UCCB and  CCTB will be eliminated for months after June 2016.

Under the  current system, provinces and territories may enter into an agreement with the  federal government to restructure CCTB base benefit amounts based on the age of  the child and/or the number of children in a family. Under the new rules, provinces  and territories will be able to negotiate an agreement with similar parameters in  order to reconfigure the Canada Child Benefit within the same fiscal envelope, if  they wish to do so, starting for the 2017-18 benefit year.

Income Splitting Credit

A non-refundable income splitting tax credit is available for  couples with at least one child under the age of 18. The credit allows a  higher-income spouse or common-law partner to notionally transfer up to $50,000  of taxable income to their spouse or common-law partner for the purpose of  reducing the couple’s total income tax liability by up to $2,000.

Budget 2016 proposes to eliminate the income  splitting tax credit for couples with at least one child under the age of 18 for  the 2016 and subsequent taxation years.

Northern Residents Deductions

Individuals  who live in prescribed areas in northern Canada for at least six consecutive  months beginning or ending in a taxation year may claim the northern residents  deductions in computing their taxable income for that year. These  include both a residency deduction and a deduction for certain  travel benefits.

The residency deduction allows each member  of a household to deduct up to $8.25 per day. Alternatively, one member of a  household can claim a maximum residency deduction of $16.50 per day if no other  member of the household claims the residency deduction (including where there  is no other member of the household). In addition, a deduction can be claimed to  offset the amount of any taxable benefits in respect of up to two employer-paid  vacation trips per year and an unlimited number of employer-paid medical trips.

The amounts  that a taxpayer may deduct under the northern residents deductions depend on  whether the taxpayer resides in the Northern Zone or the Intermediate Zone.  Residents of the Northern Zone are eligible to deduct the full amounts, while  residents of the Intermediate Zone may deduct half of the amounts.

Budget 2016 proposes to increase the maximum residency deduction that  each member of a household may claim from $8.25 to $11 per day and, where no  other member of the household claims the residency deduction, to increase the  maximum residency deduction from $16.50 to $22 per day for the 2016 taxation  year. Residents of the Intermediate Zone will be entitled to deduct half of  these increased amounts.

Labour-Sponsored Venture Capital Corporations Tax Credit

A labour-sponsored venture capital  corporation (LSVCC) is a form of mutual fund corporation, sponsored by an  eligible labour body. LSVCCs are mandated, under their enabling legislation, to  provide venture capital to small and medium-sized businesses.

Prior to 2015, individuals acquiring LSVCC  shares qualified for a 15-per-cent federal tax credit for investments of up to  $5,000 each year. The federal LSVCC tax credit was reduced to 10 per cent for  the 2015 taxation year and to five per cent for the 2016 taxation year. The  credit is scheduled to be eliminated for the 2017 and subsequent taxation  years.

A number of provinces offer a similar tax  credit, at varying investment limits and tax credit rates. LSVCCs may be  referred to by different names under provincial legislation.

Federally registered LSVCCs are subject to  the rules set out in the Income Tax Act .  Provincially registered LSVCCs are subject to the rules set out in their  enabling provincial legislation. To be eligible for the federal tax credit, a  provincially registered LSVCC must be prescribed for purposes of the Income Tax Act .

Consistent with the scheduled reduction and  elimination of the federal tax credit, new federal LSVCC registrations are not  permitted, and new provincially registered LSVCCs are not permitted to be  prescribed for the purposes of the federal tax credit.

To support provinces that use LSVCC programs to facilitate access to  venture capital for small and medium-sized businesses, Budget 2016 proposes to  restore the federal LSVCC tax credit to 15 per cent for share purchases of  provincially registered LSVCCs prescribed under the Income Tax Act for the 2016 and subsequent taxation years.

Budget 2016 also proposes that newly  registered LSVCCs under existing provincial legislation be eligible for  prescription if the provincial legislation is currently prescribed for purposes  of the federal LSVCC tax credit. New provincial regimes will be eligible for  prescription under the Income Tax Act ,  provided the enabling provincial legislation is patterned on currently  prescribed provincial legislation. For instance, to be eligible, any new  provincial regime would need to:

provide  a provincial tax credit of at least 15 per cent of an individual’s net cost of  shares purchased in an LSVCC;

require  that the LSVCC be sponsored by an eligible labour body; and

mandate  that the LSVCC invest and maintain a minimum of 60 per cent of its shareholder  equity in eligible investments, generally investments in small and medium-sized  enterprises.

While significant funding to small and  medium-sized businesses has been provided in a number of provinces through  provincial LSVCC programs, the national LSVCC program has not had a similar  impact. For this reason, the federal LSVCC tax credit for federally registered  LSVCCs will remain at five per cent for the 2016 taxation year and be eliminated  for the 2017 and subsequent taxation years. The prohibition on new federal  LSVCC registrations and the transition rules for federally registered LSVCCs  will be maintained.

Teacher and Early Childhood Educator School Supply Tax Credit

Teachers  and early childhood educators often incur at their own expense the cost of  supplies for the purpose of teaching or otherwise enhancing students’ learning in  the classroom or learning environment.

To  provide tax recognition for these costs, Budget 2016 proposes to introduce a  teacher and early childhood educator school supply tax credit. This measure will  allow an employee who is an eligible educator to claim a 15-per-cent refundable  tax credit based on an amount of up to $1,000 in expenditures made by the  employee in a taxation year for eligible supplies.

For the cost of supplies to  qualify for the credit, employers will be required to certify that the supplies  were purchased for the purpose of teaching or otherwise enhancing learning in a  classroom or learning environment. Individuals making claims will be required  to retain their receipts for verification purposes.

The  teacher and early childhood educator school supply tax credit will not be  available in respect of an amount that has already been claimed under any other  provision of the Income Tax Act .

Eligible  Educator

Teachers  will qualify as eligible educators if they hold a teacher’s certificate that is  valid in the province or territory in which they are employed. Likewise, early  childhood educators will qualify as eligible educators if they hold a certificate  or diploma in early childhood education recognized by the province or territory  in which they are employed.

Eligible  Supplies

Expenditures will be eligible for the  teacher and early childhood educator school supply tax credit if they were made  to purchase eligible supplies for use in a school or in a regulated child care  facility for the purpose of teaching or otherwise enhancing students’ learning  in the classroom or learning environment. Eligible supplies will include the  following durable goods: games and puzzles; supplementary books for classrooms;  educational support software; or containers (such as plastic boxes or banker  boxes for themes and kits). Eligible supplies will also include consumable  goods, such as:

construction paper for activities, flashcards or activity centres;

items for science experiments, such as seeds, potting soil, vinegar, baking  soda and stir sticks;

art supplies, such as paper, glue and paint; and

various stationery items, such as pens, pencils, posters and charts.

This  measure will apply to supplies acquired on or after January 1, 2016.

Ontario  Electricity Support Program

The Ontario Electricity Support Program  (OESP) is a program of the Government of Ontario that, effective January 1,  2016, provides assistance to low-income households in Ontario for the cost of  electricity. The OESP reduces the cost of household electricity by providing a  monthly credit on a recipient’s electricity bill. The credit depends on  household income and how many people live in the household.

This type of assistance received in a year is  generally required to be included in income. While an offsetting deduction is  provided so that the assistance is effectively non-taxable, amounts received  may affect income-tested federal or provincial/territorial benefits, such as  child benefits.

To ensure that income-tested benefits are  not reduced as a result of OESP amounts, Budget 2016 proposes to exempt from  income amounts received under the OESP.

This measure will apply to the 2016 and  subsequent taxation years.

Mineral Exploration Tax Credit for Flow-Through Share Investors

Flow-through shares allow resource  companies to renounce or “flow through” tax expenses associated with their  Canadian exploration activities to investors, who can deduct the expenses in  calculating their own taxable income. The mineral exploration tax credit provides an additional income tax  benefit for individuals who invest in mining flow-through shares, which  augments the tax benefits associated with the deductions that are flowed  through. This credit is equal to 15 per cent of  specified mineral exploration expenses incurred in Canada and renounced to  flow-through share investors. Like flow-through shares, the credit facilitates the raising of equity  to fund exploration by enabling companies to issue shares at a premium.

Budget 2016 proposes to extend eligibility  for the mineral exploration tax credit for one year, to flow-through share  agreements entered into on or before March 31, 2017. Under the existing  “look-back” rule, funds raised in one calendar year with the benefit of the  credit can be spent on eligible exploration up to the end of the following  calendar year. Therefore, for example, funds raised with the credit during the  first three months of 2017 can support eligible exploration until the end of  2018.

Mineral exploration, as well as new mining and related processing  activities that could follow from successful exploration efforts, can be  associated with a variety of environmental impacts to soil, water and air and,  as a result, could have an impact on the goals of the Federal Sustainable  Development Strategy. All such activity, however, is subject to applicable federal  and provincial environmental regulations, including project-specific  environmental assessments where required.

Education and Textbook Tax Credits

The education tax credit provides a 15-per-cent  non-refundable tax credit of $400 per month of full-time enrolment in a  qualifying educational program and $120 per month of part-time enrolment in a  specified educational program at a designated educational institution. The  textbook tax credit provides a 15-per-cent non-refundable tax credit of $65 per  month of full-time enrolment in a qualifying educational program and $20 per  month of part-time enrolment in a specified educational program at a designated  educational institution.

A tuition tax credit is also available that  provides a 15-per-cent non-refundable tax credit on eligible fees for tuition  and eligible examination fees paid to certain educational institutions.

A student must first claim any education,  textbook and tuition credits earned in a year on their own tax return to bring  tax payable to zero. Unused portions of the credits can be transferred to a  supporting individual, up to a limit, or carried forward by the student for use  in a future year.

Budget 2016 proposes to eliminate the education and textbook  tax credits. This measure does not eliminate the tuition tax credit. Changes  will be made to ensure that other income tax provisions—such as the tax  exemption for scholarship, fellowship and bursary income—that currently rely on  eligibility for the education tax credit or use terms defined for the purpose  of the education tax credit will be unaffected by its elimination.

This measure will apply effective January  1, 2017. Unused  education and textbook credit amounts carried forward from years prior to 2017  will remain available to be claimed in 2017 and subsequent years.

Children’s Fitness and Arts Tax Credits

The children’s fitness tax credit provides a 15-per-cent refundable  tax credit on up to $1,000 of eligible fitness expenses for children under 16  years of age at the beginning of the taxation year. For children who are  eligible for the disability tax credit and have at least $100 of eligible  expenses, the credit amount is increased by $500 and is extended to children  under 18 years of age.

The children’s arts tax credit provides a  15-per-cent non-refundable tax credit on up to $500 in eligible fees for  programs of artistic, cultural, recreational and developmental activity for  children under 16 years of age. As with the children’s fitness tax credit, the  age limit of the children’s arts tax credit is extended to children under 18  years of age and an additional $500 credit amount is available in respect of  children eligible for the disability tax credit.

Budget 2016 proposes to phase out the children’s fitness and arts tax credits by reducing the 2016 maximum eligible amounts  to $500 from $1,000 for the children’s fitness tax  credit (which will  remain refundable for 2016) and to $250 from $500 for the children’s arts tax credit. The supplemental amounts for children eligible for the disability tax credit will remain at $500 for 2016. Both credits will be eliminated for the  2017 and subsequent taxation years.

Top Marginal Income Tax Rate – Consequential Amendments

On December 7, 2015, the Government  announced a reduction of the second personal income tax rate to 20.5 per cent  from 22 per cent and the introduction of a 33-per-cent personal income tax rate  on individual taxable income in excess of $200,000, effective for the 2016 and  subsequent taxation years. These proposals were included as part of Bill C-2 ( An Act to amend the Income Tax Act ),  which was tabled on December 9, 2015.

A number of amendments were included in  Bill C-2 that were consequential to the introduction of the new 33-per-cent top  personal income tax rate. The Income Tax  Act contains a series of rules that are intended to maintain the neutrality,  fairness and integrity of the income tax system. A number of these rules either  use the top personal income tax rate or use rates or formulas that reflect it. The  consequential amendments that were announced adjust a number of the most  significant of these rules. The Government also announced that it would  review other income tax rules to determine whether they require adjustment.

Budget  2016 proposes further amendments to reflect the new top marginal income tax  rate for individuals that will:

provide  a 33-per-cent charitable donation tax credit (on donations above $200) to  trusts that are subject to the 33-per-cent rate on all of their taxable income;

apply the new 33-per-cent top  rate on excess employee profit sharing plan contributions;

increase  from 28 per cent to 33 per cent the tax rate on personal services business  income earned by corporations;

amend the definition of  “relevant tax factor” in the foreign affiliate rules to reduce the relevant tax  factor from the current 2.2 to 1.9;

amend  the capital gains refund mechanism for mutual fund trusts to reflect the new  33-per-cent top rate in the formulas that are used in computing refundable tax;

increase the Part XII.2 tax  rate on the distributed income of certain trusts from 36 per cent to 40 per  cent; and

amend the recovery tax rule for  qualified disability trusts to refer to the new 33-per-cent top rate.

These measures will apply to the 2016  and later taxation years. The charitable donation tax credit measure will be  limited to donations made after the 2015 taxation year. In the case of the rate  increase on personal services business income earned by corporations in  taxation years that straddle 2015 and 2016, the rate increase will be prorated  according to the number of days in the taxation year that are after 2015.

The measure will also extend the proposed 33-per-cent charitable donation tax credit in Bill C-2 (which  currently applies to donations made after 2015) to be available for donations  made by a graduated rate estate during a taxation year of the estate that  straddles 2015 and 2016.

Taxation of Switch Fund Shares

Canadian mutual funds can be in the legal  form of a trust or a corporation. While most funds are structured as mutual  fund trusts, some are structured as mutual fund corporations.

Many of these mutual fund corporations are organized as “switch funds”.  These offer different types of asset exposure in different funds, but each fund  is structured as a separate class of shares within the mutual fund corporation.  Investors are able to exchange shares of one class of the mutual fund  corporation for shares of another class, in order to switch their economic  exposure between the mutual fund corporation’s different funds. By virtue of a  general provision in the Income Tax Act that applies to convertible corporate securities, this exchange is deemed not  to be a disposition for income tax purposes . This deferral benefit that is available to taxable investors in switch funds is  not available to taxpayers investing in mutual fund trusts or investing on  their own account directly in securities.

To ensure the appropriate recognition of  capital gains, Budget 2016 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act so that an exchange of shares of a mutual fund  corporation (or investment corporation) that results in the investor switching  between funds will be considered for tax purposes to be a disposition at fair  market value. The measure will not apply to switches where the shares received  in exchange differ only in respect of management fees or expenses to be borne  by investors and otherwise derive their value from the same portfolio or fund  within the mutual fund corporation (e.g., the switch is between different  series of shares within the same class).

This measure will apply to dispositions of  shares that occur after September 2016.

Sales of Linked Notes

A linked note is a debt obligation, most  often issued by a financial institution, the return on which is linked in some  manner to the performance of one or more reference assets or indexes over the  term of the obligation. The reference asset or index – which can be a basket of  stocks, a stock index, a commodity, a currency or units of an investment fund –  is generally unrelated to the operations or securities of the issuer.

The two main types of linked notes are  principal-protected notes and principal-at-risk notes. Under a  principal-protected note, the amount payable to the investor at maturity is  equal to the principal amount invested plus a return, if any, wholly or  partially linked to the performance of the reference asset or index. Under a  principal-at-risk note, there is a risk, depending on the performance of the  reference asset or index, that the amount payable to the investor at maturity  may be less than the principal amount invested.

The Income Tax Act contains rules that deem interest to accrue on a prescribed debt obligation,  which includes a typical linked note. These rules require an investor in a  linked note to accrue the maximum amount of interest that could be payable on  the note in respect of a given taxation year. Investors generally take the  position that there is no deemed accrual of interest on a linked note prior to the  maximum amount of interest becoming determinable. Instead, the full amount of  the return on the note is included in the investor’s income in the taxation  year when it becomes determinable, which is generally shortly before maturity.

A specific rule provides that interest  accrued to the date of sale of a debt obligation is included in the income of  the vendor for the year in which the sale occurs. However, some investors, who  hold their linked notes as capital property, sell them prior to the  determination date to, in effect, convert the return on the notes from ordinary  income to capital gains, only 50 per cent of which is included in their income.  These investors take the position that no amount in respect of the return on a  linked note is accrued interest on the date of sale of the note for the  purposes of this specific rule. On that basis, these investors include the full  amount of the return on a linked note in the proceeds of disposition and claim  the return on the note as a capital gain.

To facilitate this planning, issuers of  linked notes often establish a secondary market where investors can sell their linked  notes prior to maturity to an affiliate of the issuer.

Budget 2016 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act so that the return on a  linked note retains the same character whether it is earned at maturity or  reflected in a secondary market sale. Specifically, a deeming rule will apply  for the purposes of the rule relating to accrued interest on sales of debt  obligations. This deeming rule will treat any gain realized on the sale of a  linked note as interest that accrued on the debt obligation for a period  commencing before the time of the sale and ending at that time. When a linked  note is denominated in a foreign currency, foreign currency fluctuations will  be ignored for the purposes of calculating this gain. An exception will also be  provided where a portion of the return on a linked note is based on a fixed  rate of interest. In that case, any portion of the gain that is reasonably  attributable to market interest rate fluctuations will be excluded.

This measure  will apply to sales of linked notes that occur after September 2016.

Business Income  Tax Measures

Expanding Tax  Support for Clean Energy

Under the capital cost allowance (CCA)  regime, Classes 43.1 and 43.2 of Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations provide accelerated CCA rates (30 per cent  and 50 per cent, respectively, on a declining-balance basis) for investments in  specified clean energy generation and conservation equipment. Both classes  include eligible equipment that generates or conserves energy by:

using a renewable energy source  (e.g., wind, solar or small hydro);

using a fuel from waste (e.g.,  landfill gas, wood waste or manure); or

making efficient use of fossil  fuels (e.g., high efficiency cogeneration systems, which simultaneously produce  electricity and useful heat).

Providing accelerated CCA is an exception  to the general practice of setting CCA rates based on the useful life of  assets. Accelerated CCA provides a financial benefit by deferring taxation.

In addition, if  the majority of the tangible property in a project is eligible for inclusion in  Class 43.1 or 43.2, certain intangible project start-up expenses (for example,  engineering and design work and feasibility studies) are treated as Canadian renewable  and conservation expenses. These expenses may be deducted in full in the year  incurred, carried forward indefinitely for use in future years, or transferred  to investors using flow-through shares.

Electric Vehicle Charging Stations

Renewable energy generation and electric  vehicles are complementary technologies. Using electricity from renewable  sources improves the environmental benefits of electric vehicles. In addition,  displacing emission-intensive fuels such as gasoline or diesel with renewable  energy for transportation purposes helps maximize the environmental benefits of  renewable energy generation. Electric vehicle charging stations are generally  included in Class 8, which provides a CCA rate of 20 per cent  calculated on a declining-balance basis.

Budget 2016 proposes to expand Classes 43.1 and 43.2 by making  electric vehicle charging stations eligible for inclusion in Class 43.1 or  43.2, based upon whether they meet certain power thresholds. Electric vehicle  charging stations set up to supply at least 90 kilowatts of continuous power  will be eligible for inclusion in Class 43.2. Those charging stations set  up to supply more than 10 kilowatts but less than 90 kilowatts of  continuous power will be eligible for inclusion in Class 43.1.

Eligible equipment of a taxpayer will  include equipment downstream of an electricity meter, owned by an electric  utility and used for billing purposes or owned by the taxpayer to measure  electricity generated by the taxpayer, provided that more than 75 per cent  of the annual electricity consumed in connection with the equipment is used to  charge electric vehicles, including:   charging stations, transformers, distribution and control panels,  circuit breakers, conduits, wiring and related electrical energy storage  equipment.

These measures will encourage investment in  technologies that can contribute to a reduction in emissions of greenhouse  gases and air pollutants, in support of targets set out in the Federal  Sustainable Development Strategy.

The measure will apply in respect of  property acquired for use on or after Budget Day that has not been used or  acquired for use before Budget Day.

Electrical Energy Storage

Electrical energy storage equipment  converts electricity into a form of energy that can be stored and then converts  the energy back into electricity at a later time. Storage can provide  environmental benefits by displacing fossil-fuelled power generation when  demand is highest and by facilitating the integration of electricity generated  from intermittent renewable energy sources.

Only limited kinds of electrical energy storage  equipment are currently eligible for accelerated capital cost allowance (CCA)  treatment when ancillary to electricity generation technologies eligible for  inclusion in CCA Classes 43.1 (30-per-cent rate) and 43.2 (50-per-cent rate) of  Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations .  The eligibility of energy storage equipment for this treatment depends on the  technology being used to generate electricity. In some instances, only  short-term storage equipment is considered eligible and only as an interpretation  of more general language including ancillary equipment. Stand-alone electrical  energy storage equipment – not associated with a Class 43.1 or Class 43.2  generation source – is not eligible for accelerated CCA. Storage equipment  which does not qualify for inclusion in these classes is generally included in  Class 8, which provides a CCA rate of 20 per cent.

Budget 2016 proposes two changes in this  area. First, it proposes to clarify and expand the range of electrical energy  storage property that is eligible for accelerated CCA on the basis that it is  ancillary to eligible generation equipment, to include a broad range of short-  and long-term storage equipment. If the storage equipment is part of an  electricity generation system that is eligible for Class 43.2 (e.g., an  eligible renewable, waste-fueled or high-efficiency cogeneration system), it  will be included in Class 43.2. If the storage equipment is part of an  electricity generation system that is eligible for Class 43.1 (i.e., a  mid-efficiency cogeneration system), it will be included in Class 43.1.

Second, it is proposed to allow stand-alone  electrical energy storage property to be included in Class 43.1 provided  that the round trip efficiency of the equipment is greater than 50 per cent. The  round trip efficiency measures the extent to which energy is maintained in the  process of converting electricity into another form of energy and then back  into electricity.

A fuel cell which uses hydrogen produced by  electrolysis equipment, where all or substantially all of the electricity used  to power the electrolysis process is generated from specified renewable sources,  will remain eligible for Class 43.2 regardless of its round trip efficiency. The  eligible generation sources will be expanded to include electricity generated  by the other renewable energy sources currently included in Class 43.2:  geothermal; waves; tides; and the kinetic energy of flowing water.

For both purposes, eligible electrical  energy storage property will include equipment such as batteries, flywheels and  compressed air energy storage. It will also include any ancillary equipment and  structures. Eligible electrical energy storage property will not include:  pumped hydroelectric storage; hydroelectric dams and reservoirs; or a fuel cell  system where the hydrogen is produced via steam reformation of methane.  Consistent with the policy intent of Classes 43.1 and 43.2, certain uses of electrical  energy storage equipment will also be excluded from eligibility: back up  electricity generation; motive uses (e.g., in battery electric vehicles or  fuel cell electric vehicles); and mobile uses (e.g., consumer batteries).

This measure will encourage investment in technologies that can contribute to a reduction in emissions of greenhouse  gases and air pollutants in support of targets set out in the Federal  Sustainable Development Strategy. Accelerated CCA will only be available in  respect of eligible stand-alone property if, at the time the property first  becomes available for use, the requirements of all Canadian environmental laws,  by-laws and regulations applicable in respect of the property have been met.

The measure will apply in respect of  property acquired for use on or after Budget Day that has not been used or  acquired for use before Budget Day.

Emissions Trading Regimes

Under emissions trading regimes,  governments impose an obligation on regulated emitters to deliver emissions  allowances to the government. The amount of the allowances required to be  delivered is determined by reference to the amount of emissions of a regulated  substance (e.g., greenhouse gases) that are produced. These allowances may be  purchased by emitters in the market or at auction, earned in relation to  emissions reduction activities or provided by the government at a reduced price  or no cost.

The tax treatment of transactions under  emissions trading regimes is currently determined under general tax principles.  No specific tax rules exist to deal with emissions trading regimes. In  addition, there are currently no Canadian or international accounting standards  that are specific to these regimes.

Stakeholders have expressed concern that  there is uncertainty about the tax treatment of transactions under emissions  trading regimes. In addition, an issue has been raised with respect to the tax  treatment of emissions allowances provided to certain emitters by a government  for no consideration, which can result in double taxation.

Characterization

For a regulated emitter, emissions  allowances are generally treated as an eligible capital property. As eligible  capital property, taxpayers are allowed to deduct a 7-per-cent annual  “depreciation” in respect of 75 per cent of the cost of the allowance (on a  declining balance basis). Budget 2016 proposes to replace the eligible capital  property regime with a new class of depreciable property. For more information,  see the discussion under “Eligible Capital Property” below.

The characterization of emissions  allowances as eligible capital property (or depreciable property) raises tax  policy concerns for the following reasons:

Capital property generally  includes property of an enduring nature. While emissions allowances can be  enduring in nature through their ability to be “banked” for use in a future  period, they are more commonly viewed as one-time-use property.

The treatment of allowances as  capital property could result in a mismatch where the obligation to remit  allowances is deductible as a current expense.

Free Emissions  Allowances

Assistance provided by a government that is  received by a taxpayer in the course of carrying on a business is generally  included in computing the taxpayer’s income from the business.  However, where an emissions allowance is provided by a government for no  consideration (a “free allowance”) and included in income as government  assistance, there is no tax rule to adjust the cost  amount of the emissions allowance to reflect this income inclusion. This would  result in taxpayers being subject to double tax on disposition of the emissions  allowance.

Timing – Income  and Expense Recognition

A taxpayer in a regulated industry may  be required to provide a government with emissions allowances, in respect of  its emissions in a particular year, at its “true-up” date in a subsequent year.  In claiming a deduction from income for the cost of its emissions, the taxpayer  may have claimed the deduction in the year that its business emits the  regulated substance as part of its revenue-generating activities or in a later  year when it becomes liable to remit allowances in respect of its emissions  produced in the previous year.

Further issues can arise where a taxpayer  receives a free allowance. If the value of this benefit is included in the  taxpayer’s income in the year that the allowance is received and an offsetting  deduction for emissions incurred is not available until a subsequent year, this  can raise cash flow concerns.

Budget 2016 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act to introduce specific  rules to clarify the tax treatment of emissions allowances and to eliminate the  double taxation of certain free allowances. Specifically, these rules will  provide that emissions allowances be treated as inventory for all taxpayers.  However, the “lower of cost and market” method for the valuation of inventory  will not be available in respect of emissions allowances because of the  potential volatility in their value.

If a regulated emitter receives a free  allowance, there will be no income inclusion on receipt of the allowance. In  addition, the deduction in respect of an accrued emissions obligation will be  limited to the extent that the obligation exceeds the cost of any emissions  allowances that the taxpayer has acquired and that can be used to settle the  obligation. Each year that a taxpayer claims a deduction in respect of an  emissions obligation, the taxpayer will quantify its deduction based on the cost  of emission allowances that it has acquired and which can be used to settle its  emissions obligation, plus the fair market value of any emissions allowances  that it still needs to obtain to fully satisfy its obligation. If a deduction  is claimed in respect of an emissions obligation that accrues in one year (for  example, 2017) and that will be satisfied in a future year (for example, 2018),  the amount of this deduction will be brought back into income in the subsequent  year (2018) and the taxpayer will be required to evaluate the deductible  obligation again each year, until it is ultimately satisfied.

If a taxpayer disposes of an emissions  allowance otherwise than in satisfaction of an obligation under the emissions  allowance regime, any proceeds received in excess of the taxpayer’s cost, if  any, for the allowance will be included in computing income.

This measure will apply to emissions  allowances acquired in taxation years beginning after 2016. It will also apply on  an elective basis in respect of emissions allowances acquired in taxation years  ending after 2012.

Small Business Taxation

Small businesses benefit from a reduced  federal corporate income tax rate of 10.5 per cent – a preference relative to  the general corporate income tax rate of 15 per cent. Specifically, the small  business deduction reduces to 10.5 per cent the federal corporate income tax  rate applying to the first $500,000 per year of qualifying active business  income of a Canadian-controlled private corporation (CCPC). There is a requirement  to allocate the annual eligible income limit of $500,000 (referred to as the  “business limit”) among associated corporations. Where a business is carried on  through a partnership, the members of the partnership share one $500,000 limit  in respect of that business. Access to the small business deduction is also phased  out on a straight-line basis for a CCPC and its associated corporations having  between $10 million and $15 million of taxable capital employed in Canada.  Gradual reductions in the small business tax rate are currently legislated for  2017, 2018 and 2019.

The dividend tax credit (DTC), provided within the personal income  tax system, is intended to compensate a taxable individual receiving dividends  for corporate income taxes that are presumed to have been paid on the corporate  income that funded those dividends. The DTC is generally meant to ensure that  income earned by a corporation and paid out to an individual as a dividend will  be subject to the same amount of tax as income earned directly by the  individual.

Small Business Tax Rate

Budget 2016 proposes that the small  business tax rate remain at 10.5 per cent after 2016. In order to preserve the  integration of the personal and corporate income tax systems, Budget 2016 also  proposes to maintain the current gross-up factor and DTC rate applicable to  non-eligible dividends (generally, dividends distributed from corporate income  taxed at the small business tax rate). Specifically, the gross-up factor  applicable to non-eligible dividends will be maintained at 17 per cent and the  corresponding DTC rate at 21/29 of the gross-up amount. Expressed as a  percentage of the grossed-up amount of a non-eligible dividend, the effective  rate of the DTC in respect of such a dividend will remain at 10.5 per cent  after 2016, in line with the small business tax rate.

Multiplication of the Small Business Deduction

The small business deduction includes rules  that are intended to preclude the multiplication of access to the deduction.  Budget 2016 proposes changes to address concerns about partnership and  corporate structures that multiply access to the small business deduction.

Partnerships

The specified partnership income rules in  the Income Tax Act are intended to  eliminate the multiplication of the small business deduction in respect of a  partnership of corporations that are not associated with each other. In such a  case, a single business limit applies with respect to the partnership’s  business. In the absence of these rules, each CCPC that is a member of a partnership  could claim a separate small business deduction of up to $500,000 in respect of  the portion of the partnership’s active business income allocated to it.

In general terms, the small business  deduction that a CCPC that is a member of a partnership can claim in respect of  its income from the partnership is limited to the lesser of the active business  income that it receives as a member of the partnership (its “partnership ABI”)  and its pro-rata share of a notional  $500,000 business limit determined at the partnership level (its specified  partnership income limit, or “SPI limit”). A CCPC’s specified partnership  income is added to its active business income from other sources, if any, and  the CCPC can claim the small business deduction on the total (subject to its  annual business limit).

Some taxpayers have implemented structures  to circumvent the application of the specified partnership income rules. In a  typical structure, a shareholder of a CCPC is a member of a partnership and the  partnership pays the CCPC as an independent contractor under a contract for  services. As a result, the CCPC claims a full small business deduction in  respect of its active business income earned in respect of the partnership  because, although the shareholder of the CCPC is a member of the partnership,  the CCPC is not a member.

To address this tax planning, Budget 2016  proposes to extend the specified partnership income rules to partnership  structures in which a CCPC provides (directly or indirectly, in any manner  whatever) services or property to a partnership during a taxation year of the  CCPC where, at any time during the year, the CCPC or a shareholder of the CCPC  is a member of the partnership or does not deal at arm’s length with a member  of the partnership. In general terms, for the purpose of the specified  partnership rules:

a CCPC will be deemed to be a  member of a partnership throughout a taxation year if it is not otherwise a member of  the partnership in the taxation year, it provides services or  property to the partnership at any time in the taxation year, a member of the partnership does  not deal at arm’s length with the CCPC, or a shareholder of the CCPC, in the  taxation year, and it is not the case that all or  substantially all of the CCPC’s active business income for the taxation year is  from providing services or property to arm’s length persons other than the  partnership;

a CCPC that is a member of a  partnership (including a deemed member) will have its active business income  from providing services or property to the partnership deemed to be partnership  ABI; and

the SPI limit of a deemed  member of a partnership will initially be nil (as it does not receive any  allocations of income from the partnership). However, an actual member of the  partnership who does not deal at arm’s length with a deemed member of the  partnership will be entitled to notionally assign to the deemed member all of  or a portion of the actual member’s SPI limit in respect of a fiscal period of  the partnership that ends in the deemed member’s taxation year (and where the  actual partner is an individual, the assignable SPI limit of all members of the  partnership will be determined as if they were corporations).

Kerry and Chris are married.

Kerry and Leslie each have a 50% interest in the limited liability      partnership (LLP).

Leslie deals at arm’s length with Kerry and Chris.

None of K Co, C Co or Chris are members of the LLP.

LLP provides accounting services to the public.

Kerry owns 100% of K Co and Chris owns 100% of C Co.

LLP has $200,000 of net income to allocate to its members.

K Co and C Co each earn $400,000 from providing accounting services      to LLP.

Current treatment

Kerry and Leslie, as partners of LLP, are each taxable on the $100,000    (50% of $200,000) allocation of partnership income at personal income tax    rates.

K Co and C Co are each taxable on their $400,000 of income from    providing services to LLP and each pays $42,000 of federal tax (income    eligible for the small business deduction ($400,000) multiplied by the    effective tax rate (10.5%)).

Proposed treatment

Leslie

Leslie remains taxable on $100,000 at personal income tax rates.

Kerry/K Co

Kerry remains taxable on $100,000 at personal income tax rates.

K Co is deemed to be a partner of LLP because it does not deal at    arm’s length with Kerry and provides services to LLP.

The full $250,000 of Kerry’s SPI limit is assigned by Kerry to K Co    (i.e., 50% of the partnership’s $500,000 business limit is what Kerry’s SPI    limit would be if Kerry were a corporation). (Alternatively, Kerry could have    assigned all or a portion of his $250,000 SPI limit to C Co.)

K Co pays $48,750 of federal tax on $400,000 (income eligible for the    small business deduction ($250,000) multiplied by the small business tax rate    (10.5%) plus income not eligible for the small business deduction ($150,000)    multiplied by the general federal corporate tax rate (15%)).

Chris /C Co

C Co is deemed to be a partner of LLP because it does not deal at    arm’s length with Kerry and provides services to LLP.

C Co pays $60,000 of federal tax on $400,000 (income not eligible for    the small business deduction ($400,000) multiplied by the general federal    corporate tax rate (15%)).

This measure will apply to taxation  years that begin on or after Budget Day. However, an actual member of a  partnership will be entitled to notionally assign all or a portion of the  member’s SPI limit in respect of their taxation year that begins before and  ends on or after Budget Day.

Corporations

The tax planning described above could use  a corporation (instead of a partnership) to multiply access to the small  business deduction. Such multiplication could occur in circumstances where a  CCPC earns active business income from providing services or property (directly  or indirectly, in any manner whatever) to a private corporation during the  CCPC’s taxation year when, in the taxation year, the CCPC, one of its  shareholders or a person who does not deal at arm’s length with such a  shareholder has a direct or indirect interest in the private corporation.

Budget 2016 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act to address such corporate  structures. A CCPC’s active business income from providing services or property  (directly or indirectly, in any manner whatever) in its taxation year to a  private corporation will be ineligible for the small business deduction where,  at any time during the year, the CCPC, one of its shareholders or a person who does  not deal at arm’s length with such a shareholder has a direct or indirect  interest in the private corporation. This ineligibility for the small business  deduction will not apply to a CCPC if all or substantially all of its active  business income for the taxation year is earned from providing services or  property to arm’s length persons other than the private corporation.

A private corporation that is a CCPC will  be entitled to assign all or a portion of its unused business limit to one or  more CCPCs that are ineligible for the small business deduction under this  proposal because they provided services or property to the private corporation.  The amount of active business income earned by a CCPC from providing services  or property to the private corporation that will be eligible for the small  business deduction (subject to the CCPC’s own business limit) will be the least  of:

the CCPC’s income from  providing services or property to the private corporation;

the amount, if any, of the private  corporation’s unused business limit – for its taxation year(s) ending in the  taxation year of the CCPC in which it provided services or property to the  private corporation – that is assigned to the CCPC; and

the amount determined by the Minister  of National Revenue to be reasonable in the circumstances.

This measure will apply to taxation years  that begin on or after Budget Day. However, a private corporation will be  entitled to assign all or a portion of its unused business limit in respect of  its taxation year that begins before and ends on or after Budget Day.

Avoidance of  the Business Limit and the Taxable Capital Limit

The associated corporation rules in the Income Tax Act are relevant for applying  both the $500,000 business limit and the $15 million taxable capital limit to  CCPCs. The rules strike a balance between allowing different family members to  carry on businesses through separate CCPCs eligible for the small business  deduction and addressing tax planning arrangements used by a single economic  group as an attempt to multiply the small business deduction.

There are a number of technical rules that  apply for the purpose of determining if two or more corporations are associated  with each other. For instance, two CCPCs are associated where they are  controlled by the same person (or group of persons), or by different related  persons if one of the related persons (or their CCPC) owns at least 25% of the  shares of the other CCPC. However, a corporation that is wholly owned by an  individual is generally not associated with a corporation that is wholly owned  by the individual’s spouse, sibling or another related individual.

There is a special rule, in subsection  256(2), under which two corporations that would not otherwise be associated  will be treated as associated if each of the corporations is associated with  the same third corporation. Since the $15 million taxable capital limit is  based on the capital of associated corporations, none of the corporations is eligible  to claim the small business deduction if the total taxable capital of the three  corporations exceeds $15 million.

There is an exception to this special rule:  two corporations that are associated because they are associated with the same  third corporation will not be treated as being associated with each other if  the third corporation is not a CCPC or, if it is a CCPC, it elects not to be  associated with the other two corporations for the purpose of determining  entitlement to the small business deduction. The effect of this exception is  that the third corporation cannot itself claim the small business deduction (if  it is a CCPC), but the other two corporations may each claim a $500,000 small  business deduction subject to their own taxable capital limit.

The above exception does not affect  the associated corporation status for the purpose of another rule that treats a  CCPC’s investment income (e.g., interest and rental income) as active business  income eligible for the small business deduction if that income is derived from  the active business of an associated corporation (subsection 129(6)).  Accordingly, two corporations may not be associated for the purpose of claiming  the maximum small business deduction while retaining the ability to treat  investment income that one receives from the other as active business income.

Where the third corporation is not a CCPC,  or is a CCPC that files an election, the other two corporations may claim the  small business deduction on investment income that traces to the active  business of the third corporation, even though the third corporation could not  have claimed the deduction either because the third corporation is not a CCPC  or because an election was filed. In addition, where the other two corporations  directly earn active business income, their small business deductions are  determined without regard to the taxable capital of the third corporation to  which they are each associated.

CCPCs that are currently misusing the  election to multiply their small business deduction are being challenged by the  Government under a specific anti-avoidance rule, and under the general  anti-avoidance rule, where the small business deduction is being claimed on  investment income that is treated as active business income. However, as any  such challenge could be time-consuming and costly, the Government is  introducing specific legislative measures to ensure that the appropriate tax  consequences apply.

Budget 2016 proposes to amend the Income Tax Act to ensure that investment  income derived from an associated corporation’s active business will be  ineligible for the small business deduction and be taxed at the general  corporate income tax rate where the exception to the deemed associated  corporation rule applies (i.e., an election not to be associated is made or the  third corporation is not a CCPC). In addition, where this exception applies  (such that the two corporations are deemed not to be associated with each  other), the third corporation will continue to be associated with each of the  other corporations for the purpose of applying the $15 million taxable  capital limit.

This measure will apply to taxation years  that begin on or after Budget Day.

Consultation on  Active versus Investment Business

Budget 2015 announced a review of the  circumstances in which income from a business, the principal purpose of which  is to earn income from property, should qualify as active business income  and therefore potentially be eligible for the small business deduction. The  consultation period ended August 31, 2015.

The small business deduction is available  on up to $500,000 of active business income of a CCPC. Active business income  does not include income from a “specified investment business”, which is  generally a business the principal purpose of which is to derive income from  property. A “specified investment business” does not include a business that  has more than five full-time employees, with the result that income earned from  such a business is eligible for the small business deduction even though its  principal purpose is to derive income from property.

The number of employees of a business  carried on by a CCPC is not relevant to the CCPC’s eligibility for the small  business deduction, unless the principal purpose of that business is to earn  income from property. Where a business has the principal purpose of earning  income from property, the CCPC may still be eligible for the small business  deduction if the business has more than five full-time employees.

Whether the principal purpose of a business  is to earn income from property is a question of fact. The Canada Revenue  Agency has published guidance and a significant body of case law has developed  relating to the factors that are relevant in making this determination.

The examination of the active versus  investment business rules is now complete. The Government is not proposing any modification  to these rules at this time.

Life  Insurance Policies

Distributions  InvolvingLife Insurance Proceeds

Life insurance proceeds received as a  result of the death of an individual insured under a life insurance policy (a “policy  benefit”) are generally not subject to income tax. A private corporation may  add the amount of a policy benefit it receives to its capital dividend account,  which consists of certain non-taxable amounts. A private corporation may elect to  pay a dividend as a capital dividend to the extent that the corporation’s  capital dividend account has a positive balance. Capital dividends are received  tax-free by shareholders.

The income tax rules for partnerships also  account for a policy benefit being non-taxable. The adjusted cost base of a  partner’s interest in a partnership is increased to the extent of the partner’s  share of a policy benefit received by the partnership. A partner can generally  withdraw funds from a partnership tax-free to the extent of the partner’s  adjusted cost base.

In the life insurance context, only the  portion of the policy benefit received by the corporation or partnership that  is in excess of the policyholder’s adjusted cost basis of the policy (the “insurance  benefit limit”) may be added to the capital dividend account of a corporation  or to the adjusted cost base of a partner’s interest in a partnership.

Some taxpayers have structured their  affairs so that the insurance benefit limit may not apply as intended,  resulting in an artificial increase in a corporation’s capital dividend account  balance. A similar result could be achieved under the rules for computing the adjusted  cost base of a partner’s interest in a partnership. This planning may allow  those taxpayers to avoid income tax on dividends payable by a private  corporation or on gains from the disposition of a partnership interest. These  results are unintended and erode the tax base.

Although the Government is challenging a  number of these structures under the existing tax rules, Budget 2016 proposes  to amend the Income Tax Act to ensure  that the capital dividend account rules for private corporations, and the  adjusted cost base rules for partnership interests, apply as intended. This  measure will provide that the insurance benefit limit applies regardless of  whether the corporation or partnership that receives the policy benefit is a  policyholder of the policy. To that end, the measure will also introduce  information-reporting requirements that will apply where a corporation or  partnership is not a policyholder but is entitled to receive a policy benefit.

This measure will apply to policy benefits  received as a result of a death that occurs on or after Budget Day.

Transfers of Life  Insurance Policies

Where a policyholder disposes of an  interest in a life insurance policy to an arm’s length person, the fair market  value of any consideration is included in computing the proceeds of the  disposition. In contrast, where a policyholder disposes of such an interest to  a non-arm’s length person, a special rule (the “policy transfer rule”) deems  the policyholder’s proceeds of the disposition, and the acquiring person’s  cost, of the interest to be the amount that the policyholder would be entitled  to receive if the policy were surrendered (the “interest’s surrender value”).

Where the policy transfer rule  applies, the amount by which any consideration given for the interest exceeds  the interest’s surrender value is not taxed as income under the rules that  apply to dispositions of interests in life insurance policies. In addition,  this excess will ultimately be reflected in the policy benefit under that  policy. Where the policy benefit is received by a private corporation, it can  be paid tax-free to that corporation’s shareholders. Where this is the case and  consideration to acquire the interest was not recognized under the policy  transfer rule, the amount of the excess is effectively extracted from the  private corporation a second time as a tax-free, rather than as a taxable,  amount. These results are unintended and erode the tax base. Similar concerns  also arise in the partnership context and where an interest in a policy is  contributed to a corporation as capital.

Budget 2016 proposes amendments to the Income Tax Act to ensure that amounts  are not inappropriately received tax-free by a policyholder as a result of a  disposition of an interest in a life insurance policy. The measure will, in  applying the policy transfer rule, include the fair market value of any  consideration given for an interest in a life insurance policy in the  policyholder’s proceeds of the disposition and the acquiring person’s cost. In  addition, where the disposition arises on a contribution of capital to a  corporation or partnership, any resulting increase in the paid-up capital in  respect of a class of shares of the corporation, and the adjusted cost base of  the shares or of an interest in the partnership, will be limited to the amount  of the proceeds of the disposition.

This measure will apply to dispositions that  occur on or after Budget Day.

Budget 2016 also proposes to amend the capital dividend account  rules for private corporations and the adjusted cost base rules for partnership  interests. This amendment will apply where an interest in a life insurance  policy was disposed of before Budget Day for consideration in excess of the  proceeds of the disposition determined under the policy transfer rule. In this  case, the amount of the policy benefit otherwise permitted to be added to a  corporation’s capital dividend account, or the adjusted cost base of an  interest in a partnership, will be reduced by the amount of the excess. In  addition, where an interest in a life insurance policy was disposed of before  Budget Day under the policy transfer rule to a corporation or partnership as a  contribution of capital, any increase in the paid-up capital in respect of a  class of shares of the corporation, and the adjusted cost base of the shares or  of an interest in the partnership, that may otherwise have been permitted will  be limited to the amount of the proceeds of the disposition.

This measure will apply in respect of policies  under which policy benefits are received as a result of deaths that occur on or  after Budget Day.

Debt Parking to Avoid Foreign Exchange Gains

In general, all amounts relevant to the  computation of income under the Income  Tax Act must be reported in Canadian dollars. Therefore, if any such amount  is denominated in a foreign currency, it must be converted into Canadian  dollars at the relevant dates. Consequently, a taxpayer may realize a gain or a  loss on the repayment of a debt denominated in a foreign currency as a result  of the fluctuation of the foreign currency relative to the Canadian dollar.

A specific rule for computing foreign  exchange capital gains and losses on a debt deems a gain made or loss sustained  on a foreign currency debt that is on capital account to be a capital gain or  loss from the disposition of the foreign currency. For this purpose, a gain or  loss is generally considered to have been made or sustained only when it is  realized, such as when the debt is settled or extinguished.

To avoid realizing a foreign exchange gain on the repayment of a  foreign currency debt, some taxpayers have entered into debt-parking  transactions. In a typical debt-parking transaction, instead of directly  repaying a debt with an accrued foreign exchange gain, the debtor would arrange  for a person with which it does not deal at arm’s length to acquire the debt  from the initial creditor for a purchase price equal to its principal amount.  Thus, from the initial creditor’s perspective, the debt would effectively be  repaid. However, from the debtor’s perspective, the debt would remain owing.  Specifically, the transfer of the debt by the initial creditor to the non-arm’s  length person would generally avoid settling or extinguishing the debt. The  non-arm’s length person, as the new creditor, would then let the debt remain outstanding  to avoid the debtor realizing a foreign exchange gain.

The debt-parking rules in the Income Tax Act were introduced to  address the use of this technique to avoid the application of the debt  forgiveness rules. Where the debt-parking rules apply to a debt, it is deemed  to have been repaid for an amount equal to its cost to the new creditor. Any difference  between this amount and the principal amount of the debt is treated as a  forgiven amount, which is first applied to reduce the tax attributes of the  debtor; one-half of any residual amount is then generally included in the  debtor’s income. While the debt-parking rules would deem the foreign currency  debt to have been settled at the time of the acquisition by the new creditor,  any foreign exchange gain realized on the debt would not be taken into account  in determining the forgiven amount of the debtor. As a result, the foreign  exchange gain would neither reduce the tax attributes, nor be included in the  income, of the debtor.

Debt-parking transactions undertaken to  avoid foreign exchange gains can be challenged by the Government under the  existing general anti-avoidance rule. However, as any such challenge could be  both time-consuming and costly, the Government is introducing a specific  legislative measure to ensure that the appropriate tax consequences apply.

Budget 2016 proposes to introduce rules  so that any accrued foreign exchange gains on a foreign currency debt will be  realized when the debt becomes a parked obligation. More particularly, the  debtor will be deemed to have made the gain, if any, that it otherwise would  have made if it had paid an amount (expressed in the currency in which the debt  is denominated) in satisfaction of the principal amount of the debt equal to:

where the debt becomes a parked  obligation as a result of its acquisition by the current holder, the amount for  which the debt was acquired; and

in other cases, the fair market  value of the debt.

For this purpose, a foreign currency debt  will become a parked obligation at any particular time where:

at that time, the current  holder of the debt does not deal at arm’s length with the debtor or, where the  debtor is a corporation, has a significant interest in the corporation; and

at any previous time, a person  who held the debt dealt at arm’s length with the debtor and, where the debtor  is a corporation, did not have a significant interest in the corporation.

In general, a person will have a  significant interest in a corporation if the person (and non-arm’s length  persons) owns shares of the corporation to which 25 per cent or more of the  votes or value are attributable. Rules similar to those contained in the debt  forgiveness rules will be introduced to determine whether a creditor is related  to, and therefore not dealing at arm’s length with, a debtor where trusts and  partnerships are involved. In particular, each partnership and trust will be  treated as a corporation having a single class of capital stock of 100 voting  shares. The members of the partnership, or the beneficiaries under the trust,  will be treated as owning such shares in accordance with their proportionate  interests in the partnership or trust. The proportionate interest of a partner  or a beneficiary will be based on the fair market value of the partner’s or  beneficiary’s interest in the partnership or trust.

Exceptions will be provided so that a  foreign currency debt will not become a parked obligation in the context of  certain bona fide commercial  transactions. In particular, a foreign currency debt will not be a parked  obligation if the debt is acquired by the current holder as part of a  transaction or series of transactions that results in the acquisition of a  significant interest in, or control of, the debtor by the current holder (or a  person related to the current holder) unless one of the main purposes of the  transaction or series of transactions was to avoid a foreign exchange gain. In  addition, a change of status between the debtor and the current holder (i.e.,  from dealing at arm’s length to not dealing at non-arm’s length or, where the  debtor is a corporation, from the current holder not having a significant interest  in the debtor to having one) will not cause the debt to become a parked  obligation unless one of the main purposes of the transaction or series of  transactions that gave rise to the change of status was to avoid a foreign  exchange gain.

Related rules will provide relief to financially distressed debtors.  This relief will be similar to the deductions currently available to debtors  with respect to amounts included in income because of the application of the  debt forgiveness rules. For instance, where a debtor is a corporation resident  in Canada, a rule will ensure that the combined federal/provincial taxes  payable on a deemed foreign exchange capital gain will not result in the  corporation’s liabilities exceeding the fair market value of its assets.

This measure will apply to a foreign  currency debt that meets the conditions to become a parked obligation on or  after Budget Day. There will be an exception where the meeting of these  conditions occurs before 2017 and results from a written agreement entered into  before Budget Day.

Valuation for Derivatives

The Income  Tax Act contains rules for the valuation of property held as inventory for  the purpose of computing a taxpayer’s income or loss from a business. In most  cases, a taxpayer can choose to value each inventory property at the lower of  its cost and its fair market value at the end of the year.

Under this lower of cost and market method,  the taxpayer compares the cost of each inventory property with its fair market  value at the end of the year. If the fair market value of the property is less  than its cost, the difference is deductible in computing the taxpayer’s income  for the year. For the purpose of the lower of cost and market method, this  lower amount is then used as the property’s cost for the subsequent year.  However, if the fair market value of the property at the end of the year is  greater than its cost, no amount is added to the taxpayer’s income for the  year. The lower of cost and market method therefore effectively permits losses  on inventory property to be recognized on an accrual basis while gains on the  same property are recognized only when it is ultimately sold.

The asymmetrical nature of this inventory  valuation method does not generally raise tax policy concerns when applied to  conventional types of inventory, such as tangible goods held for sale. However,  a recent decision of the Tax Court of Canada held that a derivative that  provides rights to a taxpayer and is held on income account would be considered  inventory property.  On that basis,  derivatives held on income account that are neither mark-to-market property  (which are not considered to be inventory property) nor property of a business  that is an adventure or concern in the nature of trade (which must be valued at  its cost to the taxpayer) could potentially qualify for the lower of cost and  market method under the inventory valuation rules.

The application of the lower of cost and market method to these  derivatives could lead to significant tax base concerns given their potentially  higher volatility and longer holding periods, as compared to conventional  inventory property.

To protect the Canadian tax base, Budget  2016 proposes to exclude derivatives from the application of the inventory  valuation rules while maintaining the status of such property as inventory. A  related rule will also be introduced to ensure that taxpayers are not able to  value derivatives using the lower of cost and market method under the general  principles for the computation of profit for tax purposes.

The measure will apply to derivatives  entered into on or after Budget Day.

Eligible Capital Property

Budget 2014 announced a consultation on the  conversion of eligible capital property (ECP) into a new class of depreciable  property. This conversion will simplify the tax compliance burden for affected  taxpayers. The Government has received a number of comments from stakeholders  responding to the policy underlying the proposal.

Some stakeholders have noted that this  proposal will result in the elimination of a tax deferral opportunity that arises  from the treatment of gains on the sale of ECP as active business income. In  contrast, gains on the disposition of depreciable property are taxed as capital  gains. This outcome is consistent with the overall intent of the proposal to  treat ECP as a type of depreciable property.

Budget 2016 proposes to repeal the ECP  regime, replace it with a new capital cost allowance (CCA) class available to  businesses and provide rules to transfer taxpayers’ existing cumulative  eligible capital (CEC) pools to the new CCA class. The proposal is not  intended to affect the application of the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized  Sales Tax (GST/HST) in this area.

Existing Rules

The ECP regime governs the tax treatment of  certain expenditures of a capital nature (eligible capital expenditures) and  receipts (eligible capital receipts) that are not otherwise accounted for as  business revenues or expenses, or under the rules relating to capital property.

An eligible capital expenditure is generally a capital expenditure  incurred to acquire rights or benefits of an intangible nature for the purpose  of earning income from a business, other than an expenditure that is deductible  as a current expense or that is incurred to acquire an intangible property that  is depreciable under the CCA rules. Eligible capital expenditures include the  cost of goodwill when a business is purchased. They also include the cost  of certain intangible property such as customer lists and licences, franchise  rights and farm quotas of indefinite duration. Under the ECP regime,  75 per cent of an eligible capital expenditure is added to the CEC  pool in respect of the business and is deductible at a rate of  7 per cent per year on a declining-balance basis.

An eligible capital receipt is generally a  capital receipt for rights or benefits of an intangible nature that is received  in respect of a business, other than a receipt that is included in income or in  the proceeds of disposition of a capital property. The ECP regime provides that  75 per cent of an eligible capital receipt is first applied to reduce  the CEC pool and then results in the recapture of any CEC previously deducted.  Once all of the previously deducted CEC has been recaptured, any excess receipt  (an ECP gain) is included in income from the business at a 50-per-cent  inclusion rate, which is also the inclusion rate that applies to capital gains.

Over the years, the ECP regime has become  increasingly complicated and many stakeholders have suggested that this  complexity could be significantly reduced if the ECP regime were replaced with  a new class of depreciable property to which the CCA rules would apply.

Proposed Rules

New  CCA class

Under this proposal, a new class of  depreciable property for CCA purposes will be introduced. Expenditures that are  currently added to CEC (at a 75-per-cent inclusion rate) will be included in  the new CCA class at a 100-per-cent inclusion rate. Because of this increased  expenditure recognition, the new class will have a 5-per-cent annual  depreciation rate (instead of 7 per cent of 75 per cent of  eligible capital expenditures). To retain the simplification objective, the  existing CCA rules will generally apply, including rules relating to recapture,  capital gains and depreciation (e.g., the “half-year rule”).

Special rules

The definition of “property” for  income tax purposes is broad and includes a right of any kind whatever. As a  result, most, but not all, eligible capital expenditures and eligible capital  receipts relate to acquisitions or dispositions of specific property and  consequently will result in an adjustment to the balance of the new CCA class  when the specific property is acquired or disposed of. These amounts will also  be relevant in the calculation of recapture and gains for the specific  property.

Special rules will apply in respect of  goodwill and in respect of expenditures and receipts that do not relate to a  specific property of the business and that would be eligible capital  expenditures or eligible capital receipts under the ECP regime. Such  expenditures and receipts will be accounted for by adjusting the capital cost  of the goodwill of the business. Every business will be considered to have  goodwill associated with it, even if there had not been an expenditure to  acquire goodwill. An expenditure that did not relate to property will increase  the capital cost of the goodwill of the business and, consequently, the  balance of the new CCA class.

A receipt that did not relate to a specific property will reduce the  capital cost of the goodwill of the business and, consequently, the balance of  the new CCA class, by the lesser of the capital cost of the goodwill (which  could be nil) and the amount of the receipt. If the amount of the receipt  exceeds the capital cost of the goodwill, the excess will be a capital gain.  Previously deducted CCA will be recaptured to the extent that the  amount of the receipt exceeds the balance of the new CCA class.

Transitional rules

Under the proposal, CEC pool balances will  be calculated and transferred to the new CCA class as of January 1, 2017. The  opening balance of the new CCA class in respect of a business will be equal to  the balance at that time of the existing CEC pool for that business. For the  first ten years, the depreciation rate for the new CCA class will be  7 per cent in respect of expenditures incurred before January 1, 2017.

Some receipts received after the time at which the new rules are  implemented could relate to property acquired, or expenditures otherwise made,  before that time. In this regard, certain qualifying receipts will reduce  the balance of the new CCA class at a 75-per-cent rate. Receipts that qualify  for the reduced rate will generally be receipts from the disposition of  property the cost of which was included in the taxpayer’s CEC and receipts that  do not represent the proceeds of disposition of property. The total amount of  such qualifying receipts, for which only 75 per cent of the receipt will  reduce the new CCA class, will generally equal the amount that could have been  received under the ECP regime before triggering an ECP gain. This rule will  ensure that receipts do not result in excess recapture when applied to reduce  the balance of the new CCA class.

Budget 2016 also proposes the following  special rules to simplify the transition for small businesses:

To allow small initial balances  to be eliminated quickly, a taxpayer will be permitted to deduct as capital  cost allowance, in respect of expenditures incurred before 2017, the greater of  $500 per year and the amount otherwise deductible for that year. This  additional allowance will be provided for taxation years that end prior to  2027.

In the past, many businesses  have had relatively small CEC balances, which were solely due to their  incorporation expenses. To reduce compliance burdens in respect of these  expenses, a separate business deduction will be provided for these  expenditures, such that the first $3,000 of these expenditures will be treated  as a current expense rather than being added to the new CCA class. This will  allow approximately 80 per cent of newly incorporated businesses to deduct the  full amount of the incorporation expenses in their initial year.

This measure, including the transitional  rules, will apply as of January 1, 2017.

Back-to-Back Loan Rules: Shareholder Loans

See the discussion of this item under  “Extension of the Back-to-Back Loan Rules” in International Tax Measures,  below.

International  Tax Measures

Base Erosion  and Profit Shifting

The Government recognizes the importance of  protecting the integrity of the Canadian tax base and ensuring that everyone  pays their fair share of tax. Doing so is consistent with the principles of  fairness, economic efficiency and responsible fiscal management.

Consistent with these objectives, Canada  has been actively engaged in the multilateral efforts of the G20 and the  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) to address base  erosion and profit shifting (BEPS). BEPS refers to tax planning arrangements  undertaken by multinational enterprises (MNEs) which, though often legal,  exploit the interaction between domestic and international tax rules to  minimize taxes. These arrangements result in taxable profits being shifted away  from the jurisdiction where the underlying economic activity has taken place,  often to low- or no-tax jurisdictions. The BEPS project aims to improve the integrity  of international tax rules to ensure that businesses pay taxes on their profits  based on where the economic activities giving rise to those profits take place  and where value is created.

On October 5, 2015, the OECD released the  package of final reports from the BEPS project, responding to a series of  issues that had been identified in the July 2013 BEPS Action Plan. At the  November 2015 G20 Leaders’ Summit, Canada and the other G20 members endorsed  the package of recommendations developed under the BEPS project. They noted  that widespread and consistent implementation will be critical to the  effectiveness of the project.

To improve the integrity of Canada’s  international tax system, the Government is moving forward with a number of initiatives  to address BEPS. Budget 2016 proposes new legislation to strengthen transfer  pricing documentation by introducing country-by-country reporting for large MNEs.

The Government is also acting on certain  other recommendations from the BEPS project:

The Canada Revenue Agency is applying  revised international guidance on transfer pricing by multinational enterprises,  which provides an improved interpretation of the arm’s length principle.

Canada is participating in international  work to develop a multilateral instrument to streamline the implementation of  treaty-related BEPS recommendations, including addressing treaty abuse.

The Canada Revenue Agency will  undertake the spontaneous exchange with other tax administrations of tax rulings  that could potentially give rise to BEPS concerns in the absence of such  exchanges.

Details on these initiatives are set out  below.

The Government is continuing to examine the  recommendations pertaining to the other aspects of BEPS. Canada is committed to  the BEPS project and will continue to work with the international community to  ensure a coherent and consistent response to BEPS.

Transfer Pricing  Documentation - Country-by-Country Reporting

The expression “transfer prices” refers to  the prices at which goods, services and intangibles are traded across  international borders between persons who do not deal with each other at arm’s  length. In order to ensure that taxable income in each jurisdiction reflects  the market value of intra-group activity, the tax rules in Canada and many  other countries generally require MNEs to set transfer prices in transactions  between their affiliated entities in different countries on an arm’s length basis.  These rules also require MNEs to prepare transfer pricing documentation to  describe their intra-group transactions and the methodologies they applied to  set prices for these transactions.

The OECD’s Transfer Pricing Guidelines for  Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations provide guidance on the application  of the arm’s length principle. The recommendations arising from the BEPS  project include changes to the Guidelines to incorporate new standards for  transfer pricing documentation. These common standards are intended to help align  transfer pricing documentation across jurisdictions. This will provide tax  administrations with better information for conducting risk assessments, while reducing  compliance costs for businesses. The recommendations include a minimum standard  for country-by-country reporting.

The country-by-country report is a form  that a large MNE will be required to file with the tax administration of the  country in which the MNE’s ultimate parent entity resides. A country-by-country  report will include the  global allocation, by country, of key variables for the MNE including: revenue,  profit, tax paid, stated capital, accumulated earnings, number of employees and  tangible assets, as well as the main activities of each of its subsidiaries. These reports will provide high-level overviews of the global  operations of large MNEs to enhance transparency and assist tax administrations  in performing effective risk assessments.

Where a jurisdiction receives a  country-by-country report from a member of an MNE, that jurisdiction will  automatically exchange the report with other jurisdictions in which the MNE  operates, provided that, in each case, the other jurisdiction has implemented  country-by-country reporting, the two jurisdictions have a legal framework in  place for automatic exchange of information (e.g., under a bilateral tax treaty  or the multilateral Convention on Mutual  Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters ), and they have entered into a  competent authority agreement relating to country-by-country reporting. If the  jurisdiction where a subsidiary resides cannot obtain the country-by-country  report from the parent’s jurisdiction through automatic exchange of  information, then in certain cases the tax administration of the subsidiary’s  jurisdiction may require the subsidiary to file the country-by-country report.  An MNE may avoid having this filing requirement imposed on multiple  subsidiaries in multiple jurisdictions by designating one of its subsidiaries  to be a “surrogate” for filing purposes. As a result of this designation,  provided that the surrogate is located in a jurisdiction which has implemented  country-by-country reporting, the surrogate would file the country-by-country  report on behalf of the MNE as a whole.

Consistent with the recommendations of the  BEPS project, Budget 2016 proposes to implement country-by-country reporting.  This measure will apply only to MNEs with total annual consolidated group  revenue of €750 million or more. Where such an MNE has an ultimate parent  entity that is resident in Canada (or a Canadian resident subsidiary in the  circumstances set out above), it will be required to file a country-by-country  report with the Canada Revenue Agency within one year of the end of the fiscal  year to which the report relates. First exchanges between jurisdictions of  country-by-country reports are expected to occur by June 2018. Before any  exchange with another jurisdiction, the Canada Revenue Agency will formalize an  exchange arrangement with the other jurisdiction and will ensure that it has  appropriate safeguards in place to protect the confidentiality of the reports.  Draft legislative proposals will be released for comment in the coming months.

Consistent with the BEPS project  recommendations released in autumn 2015, country-by-country reporting will be  required for taxation years that begin after 2015.

Revised  Transfer Pricing Guidance

The principle discussed above that  transfer prices on intra-group transactions by an MNE should reflect arm’s  length terms is the basis of Article 9 of the OECD and United Nations Model Tax  Conventions. This principle is included in most bilateral tax treaties,  including all of Canada’s tax treaties. Many countries also include the arm’s  length principle in their legislation. In Canada, the arm’s length principle is  mandated by section 247 of the Income Tax  Act .

As noted above, the OECD’s Transfer Pricing Guidelines for  Multinational Enterprises and Tax Administrations provide guidance on the  application of the arm’s length principle. Although the Transfer Pricing  Guidelines are not explicitly incorporated into Canada’s legislation, they are  used by taxpayers, the Canada Revenue Agency and the courts for interpreting  and applying section 247. Consistent application of the arm’s length principle  across jurisdictions, through application of the Transfer Pricing Guidelines,  helps to ensure the proper measurement of taxable income in each jurisdiction,  avoid double taxation, minimize inter-jurisdictional conflict between tax  administrations and promote international trade and investment.

The recommendations arising from the BEPS  project include revisions to the Transfer Pricing Guidelines. These revisions  provide an improved interpretation of the arm’s length principle, and are  intended to better ensure alignment of the profits of MNEs with the economic  activities generating those profits. The clarifications provided in the  revisions generally support the Canada Revenue Agency’s current interpretation  and application of the arm’s length principle, as reflected in its audit and  assessing practices. These revisions are thus being applied by the Canada  Revenue Agency as they are consistent with current practices.

In two areas, however, where the revisions  to the Transfer Pricing Guidelines are not yet complete, the Canada Revenue  Agency will not be adjusting its administrative practices at this time. The  BEPS project participants are still engaged in follow-up work on the  development of a threshold for the proposed simplified approach to low  value-adding services. Work is also continuing to clarify the definition of  risk-free and risk-adjusted returns for minimally functional entities (often  referred to as “cash boxes”). Canada will decide on a course of action with  regards to these measures after the outstanding work is complete.

Treaty Abuse

The BEPS project identifies treaty abuse,  and in particular treaty shopping, as one of the most important sources of BEPS  concerns. Treaty shopping occurs, for example, where a third-country resident  creates an intermediary holding company in a treaty country for purposes of  channelling, through the company, income and gains sourced in Canada to access  benefits granted under a tax treaty that would not otherwise have been  available to them.

Treaty shopping effectively extends tax  treaty benefits to third-country residents in circumstances that were not  contemplated when the tax treaty was entered into and without any reciprocal  benefits accruing to Canadian investors or to Canada. This practice undermines  the bilateral nature of tax treaties and the balance of compromise reached  between Canada and its treaty partners.

The BEPS treaty abuse minimum standard  requires countries to include in their tax treaties an express statement that  their common intention is to eliminate double taxation without creating  opportunities for non-taxation or reduced taxation through tax evasion or  avoidance, including through treaty shopping arrangements. In addition, the  treaty abuse minimum standard requires countries to implement this common  intention by adopting in their tax treaties one of two approaches to treaty  anti-abuse rules. The first of these is a general anti-abuse rule that uses the  criterion of whether one of the principal purposes of an arrangement or  transaction was to obtain treaty benefits in a way that is not in accordance  with the object and purpose of the relevant treaty provisions (a principal  purpose test). The second approach is the use of a more mechanical and specific  anti-abuse rule that requires satisfaction of a series of tests in order to  qualify for treaty benefits (a limitation on benefits rule).

Budget 2016  confirms the Government’s commitment to address treaty abuse in accordance with  the minimum standard. Canada currently has one treaty that has adopted a  limitation-on-benefits approach as well as several treaties that have adopted a  limited principal purpose test. Going forward, Canada will consider either  minimum standard approach, depending on the particular circumstances and  discussions with Canada’s tax treaty partners. Amendments to Canada’s tax  treaties to include a treaty anti-abuse rule could be achieved through  bilateral negotiations, the multilateral instrument that will be developed in  2016, or a combination of the two. The multilateral instrument is a tax treaty  that many countries could sign modifying certain provisions of existing  bilateral treaties. Canada is actively participating in international work to  develop the multilateral instrument, which would streamline the implementation  of treaty-related BEPS recommendations, including treaty abuse.

Spontaneous  Exchange of Tax Rulings

The lack of transparency in connection  with certain tax rulings provided by tax administrations was identified as an  area of concern by the BEPS project. This lack of transparency can give rise to  mismatches in tax treatment and instances of double non-taxation.

The BEPS project developed a framework for  the spontaneous exchange of certain tax rulings that could give rise to BEPS  concerns in the absence of such exchanges. The framework covers six categories  of rulings: (i) rulings related to preferential regimes; (ii) cross-border  unilateral advance pricing arrangements; (iii) rulings giving a downward  adjustment to profits; (iv) permanent establishment rulings; (v) conduit  rulings; and (vi) any other type of ruling agreed to in the future.

The Canada Revenue Agency has an  established exchange of information program and exchanges information under  Canada’s tax treaties, tax information exchange agreements and the multilateral Convention on Mutual Administrative  Assistance in Tax Matters . These agreements include provisions to restrict  the use of the exchanged information, typically limiting its use to the  enforcement of tax laws, and to ensure the confidentiality of the information.  Any information exchanged with respect to the targeted tax rulings will be  subject to the confidentiality provisions in the relevant agreement and  therefore protected in the same manner as taxpayer information.

Budget 2016 confirms the Government’s  intention to implement the BEPS minimum standard for the spontaneous exchange  of certain tax rulings. The Canada Revenue Agency will commence exchanging tax  rulings in 2016 with other jurisdictions that have committed to the minimum  standard.

Cross-Border Surplus Stripping

The paid-up capital (PUC) of the shares of  a Canadian corporation generally represents the amount of capital that has been  contributed to the corporation by its shareholders. PUC is a valuable tax attribute  because it can be returned to shareholders free of tax. Retained earnings in  excess of PUC that are distributed to shareholders are normally treated as taxable  dividends that are, for non-resident shareholders, subject to a 25-per-cent  withholding tax (unless reduced under an applicable tax treaty).

The Income Tax Act contains an “anti-surplus-stripping” rule (section 212.1) that is intended to  prevent a non-resident shareholder from entering into a transaction to extract  free of tax (or “strip”) a Canadian corporation’s retained earnings (or  “surplus”) in excess of the PUC of its shares or to artificially increase the  PUC of the shares. When applicable, the anti-surplus-stripping rule results in  a deemed dividend to the non-resident or a suppression of the PUC of the shares  that would otherwise have been increased as a result of the transaction.

An exception to this anti-surplus-stripping  rule is found in subsection 212.1(4).  It  applies where a Canadian corporation (the “Canadian purchaser corporation”)  acquires shares of a non-resident corporation that itself owns shares of a  Canadian corporation – that is, where the non-resident is “sandwiched” between  the two Canadian corporations – and the non-resident disposes of shares of the  lower-tier Canadian corporation to the Canadian purchaser corporation in order  to unwind the sandwich structure. Some non-resident corporations with Canadian  subsidiaries have misused this exception by reorganizing the group into a  sandwich structure with a view to qualifying for this exception, as part of a  series of transactions designed to artificially increase the PUC of shares of those  Canadian subsidiaries.

Budget 2016 proposes to amend the exception  in subsection 212.1(4) to ensure that it applies as intended. In particular, it  will be clarified that, consistent with the policy of the  anti-surplus-stripping rule, the exception does not apply where a non-resident  both (i) owns, directly or indirectly, shares of the Canadian purchaser corporation,  and (ii) does not deal at arm’s length with the Canadian purchaser corporation.

Transactions that misuse subsection  212.1(4) are currently being challenged by the Government under existing  provisions of the Income Tax Act ,  including the general anti-avoidance rule; these challenges will continue with  respect to transactions that occurred prior to Budget Day. This measure is  intended to promote certainty and clarify the intended scope of the existing  exception.

To address the possibility of situations  where it may be uncertain whether consideration has been received by a  non-resident from the Canadian purchaser corporation in respect of the  disposition by the non-resident of shares of the lower-tier Canadian corporation,  Budget 2016 also proposes to clarify the application of the  anti-surplus-stripping rule by deeming the non-resident to receive non-share  consideration from the Canadian purchaser corporation in such situations. The  amount of this deemed consideration will be determined by reference to the fair  market value of the shares of the lower-tier Canadian corporation received by  the Canadian purchaser corporation.

This measure will apply in respect of dispositions  occurring on or after Budget Day.

Extension of the Back-to-Back Rules

The Income  Tax Act contains “back-to-back loan” rules that  prevent taxpayers from interposing a third party between a Canadian borrower  and a foreign lender in an attempt to avoid the application of rules that would  otherwise apply if a loan were made directly between the two taxpayers. In  particular, the back-to-back loan rules in Part XIII of the Income Tax Act ensure that the amount of  withholding tax in respect of a cross-border interest payment cannot be reduced  through the use of a back-to-back arrangement.

To prevent the erosion of the Canadian tax  base through the use of back-to-back arrangements, Budget 2016 proposes to build on the existing  back-to-back loan rules by:

amending the existing  back-to-back loan rules in Part XIII to extend their application to rents and  royalties;

adding character substitution  rules to the back-to-back rules in Part XIII;

adding back-to-back loan rules  to the existing shareholder loan rules in the Income Tax Act ; and

clarifying the application of  the back-to-back loan rules to multiple-intermediary structures.

Back-to-Back  Rules for Rents, Royalties and Similar Payments

Part XIII  generally imposes a 25-per-cent withholding tax on cross-border payments of rents,  royalties or similar payments (collectively referred to as “royalties”) made by  Canadian-resident persons to non-residents. This 25-per-cent withholding tax  rate is often reduced by a tax treaty. Given that not all tax treaties negotiated by Canada  provide the same withholding rates and that some countries do not have a tax  treaty with Canada, there is an incentive for some taxpayers to interpose,  between a Canadian-resident payor of royalties and a non-resident payee, an  intermediary entity located in a favourable tax treaty country.

While such transactions may be subject to challenge under existing  anti-avoidance rules, Budget 2016 proposes to address these back-to-back  arrangements by extending the basic concepts of the back-to-back loan rules  under Part XIII to royalty payments. Where they apply, the proposed rules for  royalty payments will deem the Canadian-resident payor to have made a royalty payment  directly to the ultimate non-resident recipient, and an amount of withholding  tax, equal to the amount of withholding tax otherwise avoided as a result  of the back-to-back arrangement, will become payable on the deemed  royalty payment.

Similar to the existing back-to-back loan  rules in Part XIII, the proposed rules for royalties will consider two  arrangements to form a back-to-back arrangement if they are sufficiently connected.  Specifically, a back-to-back arrangement will exist where a Canadian-resident person  makes a royalty payment in respect of a particular lease, licence or similar agreement  (the “Canadian leg”) to a person or entity resident in a tax treaty country  (referred to as the “intermediary”) and the intermediary (or a person or  partnership that does not deal at arm’s length with the intermediary) has an  obligation to pay an amount to another non-resident person in respect of a  lease, licence or similar agreement, or of an assignment or an instalment sale  (the “second leg”), if one of the following conditions is met:

the amount that the intermediary  is obligated to pay is established, in whole or in part, by reference to

the royalty payment made by, or  the royalty payment obligation of, the Canadian-resident person; or

the fair market value of  property; any revenue, profits, income, or cash flow from property; or any  other similar criteria in respect of property, where a right to use the  property is granted under the Canadian leg; or

it can reasonably be concluded based  upon all the facts and circumstances that the Canadian leg was entered into or permitted  to remain in effect because the second leg was, or was anticipated to be,  entered into. In this regard, the fact that the Canadian leg and the second leg  are in respect of the same property would generally not be considered  sufficient on its own to support the conclusion that this condition has been  met.

As under the existing back-to-back loan  rules in Part XIII, the proposed rules for royalties will apply to a back-to-back arrangement where  the withholding tax that is payable under Part XIII on a royalty payment to the  intermediary is less than the tax that would be payable under Part XIII on a direct  payment to the other non-resident.

This  measure will apply to royalty payments made after 2016.

Character  Substitution Rules

The back-to-back loan rules contemplate a  loan between a Canadian-resident person and an intermediary in combination with  a loan between the intermediary and another non-resident person. Similarly, the  proposed back-to-back rules for royalties involve a combination of two  agreements that relate to royalty payments. However, in each case, arrangements  that provide payments that are economically similar to interest or royalty  payments can be substituted between the intermediary and the other non-resident  person.

Budget 2016 proposes to extend the back-to-back  rules in Part XIII to prevent their avoidance through the substitution of  economically similar arrangements between the intermediary and another  non-resident person. Specifically, a back-to-back arrangement may exist in  situations where

interest is paid by a Canadian-resident  person to an intermediary and there is an agreement that provides payments in  respect of royalties between the intermediary and a non-resident person;

royalties are paid by a  Canadian-resident person to an intermediary and there is a loan between the  intermediary and a non-resident person; or

interest or royalties are paid  by a Canadian-resident person to an intermediary and a non-resident person  holds shares of the intermediary that include certain obligations to pay dividends  or that satisfy certain other conditions (e.g., they are redeemable or  cancellable).

Under these proposed character substitution  rules, a back-to-back arrangement will exist where a sufficient connection is  established between the arrangement under which an interest or royalty payment  is made from Canada and the intermediary’s obligations in each of the three  situations described above. The presence of such a connection will be  determined by applying tests similar to those used for back-to-back loans and  back-to-back royalty arrangements, but adapted to reflect the particular  circumstances of these arrangements. Where a back-to-back arrangement exists  under these proposed rules, an additional payment of the same character as that  paid by the Canadian resident to the intermediary will be deemed to have been  made directly by the Canadian resident payor to the other non-resident person.

This measure will apply to interest and royalty  payments made after  2016.

Back-to-Back Shareholder Loan Rules

The  shareholder loan rules generally apply where a shareholder of a corporation  owes a debt to the corporation. If the shareholder loan rules apply in respect  of a debt owing to a corporation by its shareholder, either (i) where certain  conditions are met (generally, if the debt remains outstanding for more than  one year after the end of the corporation’s taxation year), the amount of the  debt is included in the shareholder’s income on the basis that such debt is, in  substance, equivalent to a distribution of the corporation’s profits, or (ii)  an amount determined by reference to a prescribed rate is included in the  shareholder’s income as a shareholder benefit. Where the shareholder is a  non-resident, these inclusions are deemed to be dividends subject to  withholding tax under Part XIII.

In  situations where the shareholder loan rules would otherwise apply in respect of  a debt owing by a shareholder to a corporation, there is an incentive to use a  back-to-back arrangement to avoid their application by interposing a third  party (that is not connected to the shareholder) between the corporation and  its shareholder, in order to avoid the income inclusion or withholding tax. To address the use of back-to-back arrangements to circumvent the  shareholder loan rules,  Budget 2016 proposes to amend the shareholder loan rules to include rules that  are similar to the existing back-to-back loans rules, except that the proposed  rules will apply to debts owing to Canadian-resident corporations rather than  debts owing by Canadian-resident taxpayers.

If the proposed rules apply in respect of  a debt owing by a shareholder of a Canadian-resident corporation, the  shareholder will be deemed to be indebted directly to the corporation. A  back-to-back shareholder loan arrangement will be considered to exist where a  particular person or partnership (referred to as the “intermediary”), that is  not connected with the shareholder, is owed an amount (the “shareholder debt”)  by the shareholder (or a person or partnership that is connected with the  shareholder or that is a member of a partnership that is a shareholder) and one  of the following two conditions is met:

the intermediary owes an amount  (the “intermediary debt”) to the Canadian-resident corporation and either recourse  in respect of the intermediary debt is limited in whole or in part to amounts  recovered by the intermediary on the shareholder debt, or it can reasonably be  concluded that the shareholder debt became owing or was permitted to remain  owing because the intermediary debt was or was anticipated to be entered into;  or

the intermediary has a  “specified right” in respect of a particular property that was granted by the  Canadian-resident corporation and either the existence of the specified right  is required under the terms of the shareholder debt or it can reasonably be  concluded that the shareholder debt became owing or was permitted to remain  owing because the specified right was or was anticipated to be granted.

The expression “specified right” will have the  same meaning as in the existing back-to-back loan rules.

If a back-to-back shareholder loan  arrangement exists, the shareholder will be deemed to become indebted to the  Canadian-resident corporation in an amount that is equal to the lesser of: (i)  the amount of the shareholder debt, and (ii) the amount of the intermediary  debt plus the total fair market value of property over which the intermediary  was granted a specified right. Further, to the extent that the amount of the  deemed indebtedness that would be determined in this manner either increases or  decreases at any time after the debt is deemed to arise, (i) in the case of an  increase, an additional debt equal to the increase will be deemed to become  owing at that time, and (ii) in the case of a decrease, an amount equal to the  decrease will generally be deemed to be repaid on the deemed debt on a  first-in, first-out basis.

This measure will apply to back-to-back  shareholder loan arrangements as of Budget Day. For back-to-back shareholder loan  arrangements that are in place on Budget Day, the deemed  indebtedness will be deemed to have become owing on Budget Day.

Multiple-Intermediary  Structures

The existing back-to-back loan rules in  Part XIII apply to back-to-back financing structures that involve a single  intermediary that borrows funds from a non-resident person and in turn makes a  corresponding loan to a Canadian resident (as well as certain financially  equivalent arrangements). Although the rules can apply to structures  that include two or more intermediaries (e.g., back-to-back-to-back structures  involving two intermediaries), and such structures raise similar tax policy  concerns as back-to-back structures, the manner in which the existing rules  apply to certain multiple-intermediary structures may not be entirely clear.

Budget 2016 proposes to clarify the application of the existing  back-to-back rules in Part XIII to back-to-back arrangements involving multiple  intermediaries. The proposed back-to-back rules for royalty payments will also  apply to multiple-intermediary back-to-back arrangements. Under these proposed  rules, a back-to-back arrangement will comprise all the arrangements that are sufficiently  connected to the arrangement under which a Canadian resident makes a  cross-border payment of interest or royalties to an intermediary. The presence  of such a connection will be established by applying similar tests to those  that are used to establish a sufficient connection in a single intermediary context.  Where a back-to-back arrangement involving multiple intermediaries exists, an  additional payment (of the same character as that paid by the Canadian resident  to the first intermediary) will be deemed to have been paid directly by the  Canadian resident to the ultimate non-resident recipient in a chain of  connected arrangements.

Budget 2016 also proposes to include rules  addressing multiple-intermediary arrangements within the proposed back-to-back shareholder  loan rules.

This measure will apply to payments of  interest or royalties made after 2016 and to shareholder debts as of January 1, 2017.

Sales and  Excise Tax Measures

Health Measures

Medical and  Assistive Devices

Medical and assistive devices that are  specially designed to assist an individual in treating or coping with a chronic  disease or illness or a physical disability are generally zero-rated under the  Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax (GST/HST). Zero-rating means that  suppliers do not charge purchasers GST/HST on these medical devices and are  entitled to claim input tax credits to recover the GST/HST paid on inputs in  relation to these supplies. The medical devices eligible for zero-rating are  listed in the GST/HST legislation.

Budget 2016 proposes to add insulin pens,  insulin pen needles and intermittent urinary catheters to the list of  zero-rated medical devices to reflect the evolving nature of the health care  sector.

Insulin Pens and Insulin Pen Needles

Insulin infusion pumps and insulin syringes  are currently included in the list of zero-rated medical devices. These devices  are used to inject insulin for the treatment of diabetes. Insulin itself is  currently zero-rated as a drug.

Insulin pens are also used to inject  insulin for the treatment of diabetes, and are an alternative to infusion pumps  or syringes. Budget 2016 proposes to add insulin pens and insulin pen needles  to the list of zero-rated medical devices.

This measure will apply to supplies made  after Budget Day and to supplies made on or before Budget Day unless the supplier  charged, collected or remitted GST/HST in respect of the supply.

Intermittent Urinary Catheters

Urinary appliances that are designed to be  worn by an individual are currently included in the list of zero-rated medical  devices.  Intermittent urinary catheters  are an alternative to catheters that are left in place.

Budget 2016 proposes to add intermittent  urinary catheters, if supplied on the written order of a medical doctor,  registered nurse, occupational therapist or physiotherapist for use by a  consumer named in the order, to the list of GST/HST zero-rated medical and  assistive devices.

This measure will apply to supplies made  after Budget Day.

Purely Cosmetic  Procedures

Supplies of purely cosmetic procedures are  not considered to be supplies of basic health care and are intended to be  subject to the GST/HST, regardless of the status of the supplier.

Budget 2016 proposes to clarify that the  GST/HST generally applies to supplies of purely cosmetic procedures provided by  all suppliers, including registered charities. Taxable procedures will  generally include surgical and non-surgical procedures aimed at enhancing or  altering an individual’s appearance, such as liposuction, hair replacement  procedures, hair removal, botulinum toxin injections and teeth whitening.

A cosmetic procedure will continue to be  exempt if it is required for medical or reconstructive purposes, such as  surgery to ameliorate a deformity arising from, or directly related to, a  congenital abnormality, a personal injury resulting from an accident or trauma,  or a disfiguring disease. As well, cosmetic procedures paid for by a provincial  health insurance plan will continue to be exempt.

This measure will apply to supplies made  after Budget Day.

Exported Call Centre Services

Under the GST/HST rules, exported supplies  are generally relieved (i.e., zero-rated) from the GST/HST. This means that  suppliers do not charge purchasers GST/HST on these supplies and are entitled  to claim input tax credits to recover the GST/HST paid on inputs used in  relation to these supplies.

Budget 2016 proposes to modify the  zero-rating rules for certain exported supplies of call centre services.  Specifically, the supply of a service of rendering technical or customer  support to individuals by means of telecommunications (e.g., by telephone,  email or web chat) will generally be zero-rated for GST/HST purposes if:

the service is supplied to a  non-resident person that is not registered for GST/HST purposes; and

it can reasonably be expected  at the time the supply is made that the technical or customer support is to be  rendered primarily to individuals who are outside Canada at the time the  support is rendered to those individuals.

This measure will apply to supplies made  after Budget Day. It will also apply to supplies made on or before Budget Day  in cases where the supplier did not, on or before that day, charge, collect or  remit an amount as or on account of tax under Part IX of the Excise Tax Act in respect of the supply.

Reporting of Grandparented Housing Sales

Under  the transitional rules that applied when a province either joined the  harmonized value-added tax system since 2010 or increased its HST rate, certain  sales of newly constructed or substantially renovated homes were grandparented for  HST purposes. This meant that the housing sale was not subject to the  provincial component of the HST or the increased HST rate, as applicable. A  housing sale was generally grandparented if the agreement of purchase and sale  was entered into in writing on or before the announcement date of the  transitional rules and ownership and possession of the housing was transferred on  or after the date on which the HST, or the increased HST rate, came into  effect.

Under  the current rules, builders are subject to special reporting requirements,  which involve reporting their grandparented housing sales where the purchaser  was not entitled to a GST New Housing Rebate or a GST New Residential Rental  Property Rebate. The rules also include penalties for misreporting (i.e.,  under-reporting, over-reporting or failing to report).

Budget 2016 proposes to simplify builder  reporting by:

limiting the reporting requirement to those grandparented housing sales for  which the consideration is equal to or greater than $450,000; and

providing builders with an opportunity to correct past misreporting and  avoid potential penalties by allowing them to elect to report all past  grandparented housing sales for which the consideration was equal to or greater  than $450,000.

This measure will apply in respect of any  reporting period of a person that ends after Budget Day. In addition, if the  above election is made, the measure will also apply to any supply of  grandparented housing in respect of which the federal component of the HST became  payable on or after July 1, 2010. Builders will generally have between May 1,  2016 and December 31, 2016 to make the election.

GST/HST  on Donations to Charities

The GST/HST does not apply to a donation if  the donor does not receive anything in return. However, if the donor receives  property or services in exchange for the donation, even if the value of the  donation exceeds the value of the offered property or services, the GST/HST  generally applies on the full value of the donation. (A number of exceptions to  this treatment apply, including where the service or property offered by the  charity relates to a special fundraising event, such as a gala dinner, annual  cookie sale or charity auction, or where the charity provides the donor goods  that were previously gifted to the charity. Such supplies are exempt from  GST/HST. In addition, a charity that qualifies as a “small supplier” (e.g.,  makes under $50,000 of taxable sales annually) is not required to collect  GST/HST.)

Special rules are provided under the Income Tax Act to deal with transactions  where property or services are supplied in exchange for or in recognition of a  donation to a charity. Under the Income  Tax Act “split-receipting” rules, where a charity encourages or recognizes  a donation by supplying property or services in exchange, the charity generally  may issue a donation receipt for the amount paid by the donor less the value of  any property or service that the donor receives. Consequently, such donations  are treated less favourably under the GST/HST than under the Income Tax Act .

To bring the GST/HST treatment of this type  of exchange into line with the treatment under the Income Tax Act split-receipting rules, Budget 2016 proposes a  relieving change to provide that when a charity supplies property or services  in exchange for a donation and when an income tax receipt may be issued for a  portion of the donation, only the value of the property or services supplied  will be subject to GST/HST. The proposal will apply to supplies that are not  already exempt from GST/HST. It will ensure that the portion of the donation  that exceeds the value of the property or services supplied is not subject to  the GST/HST.

This measure will apply to supplies made  after Budget Day.

In addition, where a charity did not  collect GST/HST on the full value of donations made in exchange for an  inducement, for supplies made between December 21, 2002 (when the income tax  split-receipting rules came into effect) and Budget Day, the following  transitional relief will be provided:

If GST/HST was charged on only  the value of the inducement, consistent with the income tax split-receipting  rules, or if the value of the inducement was less than $500, the donors’ and  charities’ GST/HST obligations will effectively be satisfied, resulting in no  further GST/HST owing.

In other cases, the charity  will be required to remit GST/HST on the value of the inducement only (i.e.,  the relieving split-receipting rules will apply).

De Minimis Financial Institutions

Under the GST/HST, special rules apply to  financial institutions, particularly in determining their entitlement to input  tax credits. For GST/HST purposes, financial institutions include persons whose  main business is providing financial services such as banks, insurance  companies, investment dealers and investment plans. The GST/HST legislation  also includes rules to ensure that other persons that provide a significant  amount of financial services, such that they may be in competition with  traditional financial institutions, are also treated as financial institutions  for GST/HST purposes. For example, a person will generally be treated as a  financial institution throughout a taxation year if the person’s income for the  preceding taxation year from interest, fees or other charges with respect to  the making of an advance, the lending of money, the granting of credit, or  credit card operations, exceeds $1 million.

Under this rule, a person that earns more  than $1 million in interest income in respect of bank deposits in a taxation  year will be considered to be a financial institution for GST/HST purposes for  its following taxation year even though the earning of such interest would  generally not, by itself, bring that person into competition with traditional  financial institutions.

To allow a person to engage in basic  deposit-making activity without that activity leading it to being treated as a  financial institution for GST/HST purposes, Budget 2016 proposes that interest  earned in respect of demand deposits, as well as term deposits and guaranteed  investment certificates with an original date to maturity not exceeding 364  days, not be included in determining whether the person exceeds the $1 million  threshold.

This measure will apply to taxation years  of a person beginning on or after Budget Day and to the fiscal year of a person  that begins before Budget Day and ends on or after that day for the purposes of  determining if the person is required to file the Financial Institution GST/HST Annual  Information Return.

Application  of GST/HST to Cross-Border Reinsurance

The  GST/HST applies to domestic purchases as well as to importations of property  and services. GST/HST rules require certain recipients of imported taxable  supplies of services and intangible personal property to pay tax on a  self-assessment basis.  Additionally, special  GST/HST imported supply rules for financial institutions require a financial  institution, including an insurer, with a presence outside Canada (e.g., in the  form of a branch or a subsidiary) to self-assess GST/HST on certain expenses  incurred outside Canada that relate to its Canadian activities.

Budget  2016 proposes to clarify that two specific components of imported reinsurance  services, ceding commissions and the margin for risk transfer, do not form part  of the tax base that is subject to the self-assessment provisions contained in  the GST/HST imported supply rules for financial institutions and to set out specific  conditions under which the special rules for financial institutions do not  impose GST/HST on reinsurance premiums charged by a reinsurer to a primary  insurer.

This  measure will apply as of the introduction of the special GST/HST imported  supply rules for financial institutions (i.e., in respect of any specified year  of a financial institution that ends after November 16, 2005). In addition,  this measure will allow a financial institution to request a reassessment by  the Minister of National Revenue of the amount of tax owing by the financial  institution under the special GST/HST imported supply rules for a past  specified year of the financial institution, as well as any related penalties  or interest, but solely for the purpose of taking into account the effect of  this measure. A financial institution will have until the day that is one year  after the day that these amendments receive Royal Assent to request such a  reassessment.

Closely Related Test

Under the GST/HST, special relieving rules  allow the members of a group of closely related corporations or partnerships to  neither charge nor collect GST/HST on certain intercompany supplies. To qualify  for these relieving rules, each member of this group must, among other  requirements, be considered to be closely related to each other member of the  group, supporting the assumption that the members effectively operate as a  single entity.

In the case of a subsidiary corporation owned by a parent  corporation or partnership, the closely related concept is reflected in a test  that requires the parent to have nearly complete ownership and voting control  over the subsidiary corporation. The current test requires that the parent  corporation or partnership own 90 per cent or more of the value and number of  the shares of the subsidiary corporation that have full voting rights under all  circumstances. However, due to the complexity of share capital structures, it  has been suggested that a parent corporation or partnership could be considered  to be closely related to a subsidiary corporation even if it lacks nearly  complete voting control over the subsidiary corporation.

To ensure that the closely related test  applies only in situations where nearly complete voting control exists,  Budget 2016 proposes to require that, in addition to meeting the conditions of  the current test, a corporation or partnership must also hold and control 90  per cent or more of the votes in respect of every corporate matter of the  subsidiary corporation (with limited exceptions) in order to be considered  closely related.

This measure will  generally apply as of the day that is one year after Budget Day. The measure  will apply as of the day after Budget Day for the purposes of determining  whether the conditions of the closely related test are met in respect of  elections under section 150 and section 156 of the Excise Tax Act that are filed after Budget Day and that are to be  effective as of a day that is after Budget Day.

Restricting the Relief of Excise Tax on Diesel and Aviation Fuel

The Excise  Tax Act imposes an excise tax on diesel and aviation fuel manufactured and  delivered in, or imported into, Canada. The Excise  Tax Act contains a limited number of provisions that relieve the  application of the excise tax on diesel fuel in specific circumstances. These  provisions include relief for diesel fuel used as heating oil or to generate  electricity. Over time, court decisions have expanded these relief provisions.  To ensure that the scope of these relief provisions remains targeted, Budget  2016 proposes two measures to clarify instances in which relief is provided.

Heating Oil

The existing excise tax relief for heating  oil broadly applies to diesel fuel that is consumed to produce heat for any  purpose, including in industrial processes (e.g., using diesel fuel as part of  an explosive blasting agent).

To ensure that the relief provided for heating oil applies only to  heating in respect of buildings, Budget 2016 proposes to define heating oil,  for excise tax purposes, as fuel oil that is consumed exclusively for providing  heat to a home, building or similar structure, and is not consumed for  generating heat in an industrial process.

This measure will apply to fuel delivered  or imported after June 2016, and to fuel delivered or imported before July 2016  that is used, or intended to be used, after June 2016.

Generation of  Electricity

Diesel fuel consumed for motive purposes is  subject to excise tax. However, the excise tax exemption for diesel fuel used  in the generation of electricity currently applies to diesel fuel used in or by  a vehicle to generate electricity, if more than half of the electricity  generated is used for purposes other than the operation of the vehicle. This  treatment complicates the administration of the tax system.

Budget 2016 proposes to remove the  generation of electricity exemption for diesel fuel used in or by a vehicle,  including a conveyance attached to the vehicle, of any mode of transportation.  As such, no relief will apply to fuel used to produce electricity in any vehicle  (e.g., trains, ships, airplanes), irrespective of the purpose for which the  electricity is used.

This measure will apply to fuel  delivered or imported after June 2016, and to fuel delivered or imported before  July 2016 that is used, or intended to be used, after June 2016.

Enhancing Certain Security and Collection Provisions in the Excise Act, 2001

The excise duty frameworkcontains a number of provisions with  respect to the enforcement of, and compliance with, the excise duties imposed  under the Excise Act, 2001 on  tobacco products, spirits and wine. To help ensure that these provisions  continue to protect the excise duty base, Budget 2016 proposes to enhance  certain security and collection rules in the Excise Act, 2001 .

Security Provisions

Under the Excise Act, 2001 ,  manufacturers of tobacco products must hold a licence and all tobacco products  for entry into the Canadian duty-paid market must have a duty-paid stamp  affixed to them. Tobacco manufacturers and other prescribed persons that import  tobacco products must provide and maintain security with the Canada Revenue  Agency (CRA) in order to be issued a tobacco licence or any duty-paid stamps.  The amount of security is generally based on monthly excise duty remittances or  the quantity of duty-paid stamps issued, to a maximum of $2 million. This  security requirement has been capped at $2 million since the inception of  the Excise Act, 2001 .

To ensure that this security requirement  better reflects current tobacco duty rates, Budget 2016 proposes to increase  the maximum amount of security required for a person to be issued a licence or  any duty-paid stamps from $2 million to $5 million.

This change will be effective on the later  of the day following the day of Royal Assent to the legislation enacting the new  collection proposal set out below or three months following Budget Day.

Collection  Provisions

In general, when a person objects to, or  appeals, an assessment of an amount payable under the Excise Act, 2001 , the CRA is restricted from taking certain collection  actions while a decision or judgment is pending, and there is no obligation  under the Excise Act, 2001 on the person to ensure payment of an amount that has been assessed.

To enhance certain enforcement measures  under the Excise Act, 2001 ,  Budget 2016 proposes to give the Minister of National Revenue the authority to  require security for payment of assessed amounts and penalties in excess of $10  million that are not otherwise collected under the Excise Act, 2001 . If the requested security is not furnished  to the Minister, Budget 2016 also proposes that the Minister be provided with  the authority to collect an amount equivalent to the amount of security that  the Minister had required.

This measure will apply to amounts assessed  and penalties after the day of Royal Assent to the enacting legislation.

Other Measures

Aboriginal Tax Policy

In  successive budgets since 1997, the Government of Canada has expressed its  willingness to put into effect taxation arrangements with interested Aboriginal  governments. To date, the Government of Canada has entered into more than 50  taxation arrangements in respect of sales tax and personal income tax with  Aboriginal governments. The Government of Canada confirms its willingness to  discuss and put into effect direct taxation arrangements with interested  Aboriginal governments.

The  Government of Canada also supports direct taxation arrangements between  interested provinces or territories and Aboriginal governments and will  continue to facilitate such arrangements.

Status of  Outstanding Tax Measures

Budget 2016 confirms the Government’s  intention to proceed with the following tax and related measures that were  announced in the current session of Parliament but have not yet been  legislated:

the common reporting standard established  by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development for the automatic  exchange of financial account information between tax authorities; and

legislative proposals on the  income tax rules for certain trusts and their beneficiaries (draft legislative  proposals were released for comment on January 15, 2016).

A number of tax measures that were  originally proposed in previous budgets or during the last Parliament were not  legislated before Parliament was dissolved as a result of the election call.  Most of these measures would close tax loopholes and improve the integrity of the  tax system, relieve taxpayers of certain tax consequences or improve the  administration of the tax system.

Budget 2016 confirms the Government’s  intention to proceed with tax and related measures, as modified, to take into  account consultations and deliberations since their announcement or release,  relating to:

“synthetic equity arrangements”  under the dividend rental arrangement rules;

the conversion of capital gains  into tax-deductible inter-corporate dividends (section 55);

the offshore reinsurance of  Canadian risks;

alternative arguments in  support of an assessment;

an exception to the withholding  tax requirements for payments by qualifying non-resident employers to  qualifying non-resident employees;

the repeated failure to report  income penalty;

the acquisition or holding of  limited partnership interests by registered charities;

the qualification of certain costs  associated with undertaking environmental studies and community consultations  as Canadian exploration expenses;

the sharing of taxpayer  information within the Canada Revenue Agency to facilitate the collection of  certain non-tax debts;

the sharing of taxpayer  information with the Office of the Chief Actuary;

the tax deferral in respect of  the commercialization of the Canadian Wheat Board;

the Goods and Services  Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax joint venture election; and

the relief of the Goods and  Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax for feminine hygiene products.

Budget 2016 also announces the Government’s  intention not to proceed with the measure announced in Budget 2015 that would  provide an exemption from capital gains tax for certain dispositions of private  corporation shares or real estate where cash proceeds from the disposition are  donated to a registered charity or other qualified donee within 30 days.

Budget 2016 affirms the Government’s  commitment to move forward as required with technical amendments to improve the  certainty of the tax system.



<<< source: nwmm-amvm-en.html >>>

Notice of Ways and Means Motions

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

Notice Of Ways and Means Motion to Amend The Income Tax Act and Other Tax Legislation



<<< source: middle-class-classe-moyenne-en.html >>>

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

Strengthening the Middle Class Investing in the middle class, skills training and infrastructure

A strong economy starts with a strong middle class. When you have an economy that works for the middle class, you have a country that works for everyone.

When the middle class thrives, it creates more than just good jobs and opportunity; it can drive real change.

The Middle Class Tax Cut

A strengthened middle class means hard-working Canadians can look forward to a good standard of living and a bright future for their children.

On December 7, 2015, as one of its first actions, the Government cut taxes for nearly 9 million Canadians by reducing the second personal income tax rate to 20.5 per cent from 22 per cent. Single individuals who benefit will see an average tax reduction of $330 every year, and couples who benefit will see an average tax reduction of $540 every year.

To help pay for the tax cut, the Government raised taxes on the wealthiest Canadians by introducing a new top income tax rate of 33 per cent on individual taxable income in excess of $200,000.

Canada Child Benefit

The new Canada Child Benefit (CCB) will put more money in the pockets of middle class families—9 out of 10 families with children will get more—while helping raise hundreds of thousands of children out of poverty. The CCB will provide a maximum annual benefit of up to $6,400 per child under the age of 6, and up to $5,400 per child aged 6 through 17. Payments to families will begin in July 2016.

The CCB will be:

Simpler —families will receive a single payment every month;

Tax-free —families will not have to pay back part of the amount received when they file their tax returns;

Better targeted to those who need it most—low- and middle-income families will receive more benefits, and those with the highest incomes (generally over $150,000) will receive lower benefits; and

Much more generous —families benefitting will see an average increase in child benefits of almost $2,300.

Helping Young Canadians Succeed

The Government is committed to supporting opportunities for young Canadians by ensuring that they have the skills and experience they need to succeed.

Student financial assistance must keep up with the rising costs of post-secondary education.

Budget 2016 will ensure that post-secondary education remains affordable for students from low- and middle-income families and that debt loads are manageable.

In addition to doubling the size of the Canada Summer Jobs program, the Government is investing in young Canadians by making it easier for them to join the workforce through enhancements to the Youth Employment Strategy and investments to strengthen co-op and on-the-job learning opportunities.

The Government will also create an Expert Panel on Youth Employment to advise on innovative ways to create good jobs for vulnerable youth.

Employment Insurance

The Government is taking immediate action to improve the Employment Insurance (EI) system to make sure Canadians get the help they need, when they need it.

This includes eliminating the higher EI eligibility requirements that make it difficult for those who are new entrants, or are re-entering the labour market, to access benefits. Young Canadians, recent immigrants, and those re-entering the job market after an absence will face the same eligibility requirements as other people in the region where they live.

To reduce the period of time that out-of-work Canadians are without income, Budget 2016 proposes to reduce the EI waiting period from two weeks to one week, effective January 1, 2017.  Improvements to EI service delivery will also ensure that Canadians get their benefits as quickly as possible.

Certain regions have been particularly hard hit by the falling commodity prices, and unemployment in those areas has increased sharply. Budget 2016 will help workers and their families while they seek new jobs by temporarily extending EI benefits in those regions.

Skills Training

Canadians deserve to have access to the training they need to develop skills demanded by the jobs of tomorrow.

The Government will invest in skills training to improve access to good jobs. The Government’s plans include increased investments in intergovernmental labour market agreements, a new framework to support union-based apprenticeship training, and a pilot program testing new approaches to skills and employment training for Indigenous peoples.

Creating Jobs and Prosperity for the Middle Class

Investing in infrastructure creates good, well-paying jobs that can help the middle class grow and prosper today.  In Budget 2016, the Government will implement an historic plan to invest more than $120 billion in infrastructure over 10 years, to better meet the needs of Canadians and better position Canada’s economy for the future.

Phase 1 of the Government’s long-term infrastructure plan provides $11.9 billion over five years to immediately invest in the infrastructure Canadians need—to modernize and rehabilitate public transit, water and wastewater systems, provide affordable housing, and protect infrastructure systems from the effects of climate change.

Phase 2 will deliver on the remaining eight years of the Government’s long-term infrastructure plan. In this phase, the goals will be broader and more ambitious: a more modern, cleaner economy; a more inclusive society; and an economy better positioned to capitalize on the potential of global trade. It will make Canada’s largest cities better places to live through cost-effective, sustainable, integrated transportation networks.

A long-term infrastructure investment plan is an opportunity to make meaningful contributions to Canada’s economic growth and sustainable development by addressing important infrastructure challenges of national significance. Ambitious projects will be supported to reduce urban transportation congestion, improve and expand trade corridors, and reduce the carbon footprint of the national energy system.



<<< source: economy-economie-en.html >>>

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

An Innovative and Clean Economy Smart, targeted investments in science, research, innovation and the environment

A More Innovative Country

New ideas drive economic growth. That’s why Budget 2016 defines a new vision for Canada’s economy as a centre of global innovation.

Investments in Budget 2016 will start Canada on the right path, through support for leading-edge research and for innovative and job-creating businesses. Together, these actions are the foundation for a more inclusive society that creates good jobs and a better quality of life for the middle class and those working hard to join it.

A Clean Growth Economy

Protecting the environment and growing the economy go hand in hand. Countries around the world are looking for new ways to expand and green their economies and create opportunities for people.

Clean technologies are key to the Government’s approach to promoting sustainable economic growth and will play a critical role in Canada’s transformation into a low-carbon economy. The global clean technology market presents a promising opportunity for Canadian businesses, a source of new clean jobs for the middle class and a driver of prosperity for us all.

The Government is also providing leadership as Canada works towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improving air quality. Canada is developing a pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change that will meet or exceed Canada’s international greenhouse gas emissions targets. The success of the pan-Canadian Framework depends on a collaborative approach between provincial, territorial and federal governments.

Budget 2016 takes a significant step towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improving air quality by providing almost $2.9 billion over five years to address climate change and air pollution issues.

“To encourage economic growth, the Government will make strategic investments in clean technology, provide more support for companies seeking to export those technologies, and lead by example in their use.”

“We can fight climate change without sacrificing growth and prosperity. In fact, our global push toward a low-carbon economy will produce new companies, new growth, and new prosperity.”

$2 billion over three years, starting in 2016–17, for a new Post-Secondary Institutions Strategic Investment Fund, a time-limited initiative that will support up to 50 per cent of the eligible costs of infrastructure projects at post-secondary institutions and affiliated research and commercialization organizations, in collaboration with provinces and territories.

$2 billion over two years, starting in 2017–18, to establish the Low Carbon Economy Fund.

More than $1 billion over four years to support future clean technology investments, including in the forestry, fisheries, mining, energy and agriculture sectors. In addition, over $130 million over five years to support clean technology research, development and demonstration activities.

$345.3 million over five years to Environment and Climate Change Canada, Health Canada and the National Research Council to take action to address air pollution in Canada.

$142.3 million over five years to add new national parks and improve Canadians’ access during the 150th anniversary of Confederation and beyond, and enhance programming.

Enhancing Canada’s Knowledge Advantage

Budget 2016 will provide up to $2 billion over three years for a new Post-Secondary Institutions Strategic Investment Fund that will support up to 50 per cent of the eligible costs of on-campus infrastructure projects, in collaboration with provinces and territories.

Strengthening Canada’s World-Class Research

Budget 2016 will provide an additional $95 million per year on an ongoing basis to the granting councils—the highest amount of new annual funding for discovery research in more than a decade.

Advancing Canadian Leadership in Genomics

To continue to support leading genomics researchers and promising scientific breakthroughs, Budget 2016 will provide $237.2 million to support Genome Canada to the end of 2019–20.

Supporting Canada’s Continued Leadership in Space

To secure Canada’s place in the International Space Station, Budget 2016 will provide up to $379 million over eight years for the Canadian Space Agency to extend Canada’s participation to 2024.

Strengthening Innovation Networks and Clusters

Budget 2016 will make available up to $800 million over four years, starting in 2017–18, to support innovation networks and clusters. This support will fuel growth by catalyzing private sector dynamism and contribute to better connecting innovators to achieve greater impacts for public investments in innovation. More details will be provided in the coming months as part of the Government’s upcoming Innovation Agenda.

A Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change

Budget 2016 will provide $2 billion over two years, starting in 2017–18, to establish the Low Carbon Economy Fund. The Fund will support provincial and territorial actions that materially reduce greenhouse gas emissions and are incremental to current plans.

Accelerating Clean Technology Development

Investing in the research, development and demonstration of new clean technologies brings them closer to reality. This will help meet climate change objectives, make Canadian companies more competitive and create clean jobs. Budget 2016 will provide over $130 million over five years, starting in 2016–17, to support clean technology research and development.

Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Development

Energy efficiency and clean energy policies increase the uptake of clean technologies, reduce the environmental impact of energy use and can save Canadians money. These measures are essential for the transition to a low-carbon economy. Budget 2016 will provide $128.8 million over five years to Natural Resources Canada to deliver energy efficiency policies and programs.

Adapting to Climate Change

Canada needs to adapt to a changing climate and strengthen the resilience of communities to the impacts of climate change. Budget 2016 will provide $129.5 million over five years to seven federal departments and agencies to build the science base to inform decision-making, protect the health and well-being of Canadians, build resilience in the North and Indigenous communities, and make key economic sectors more competitive.

Free Access and Expanding Canada’s National Parks

The Government is committed to expanding national parks and national marine conservation areas, and to ensuring that more Canadians experience our parks and historic sites. Budget 2016 will provide up to $142.3 million over five years to support these initiatives.

Ocean and Freshwater Research

Oceans and waterways are vital to Canada’s economy. They connect us to the world and are a way of life for coastal and Indigenous communities. Budget 2016 will provide up to $197.1 million over five years to Fisheries and Oceans Canada to increase ocean and freshwater science monitoring and research activities and to provide support for the Experimental Lakes Area in Northwestern Ontario.



<<< source: inclusive-fair-inclusif-equitable-en.html >>>

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

An Inclusive and Fair Canada A better, more inclusive Canada where all Canadians have a real chance to succeed

Canada’s strength lies in its diversity. That is why the Government set out an agenda to help all Canadians to build better lives and contribute to and share in the prosperity of the country. Budget 2016 delivers on this agenda, with investments for those who need it most, including seniors, Indigenous peoples and veterans.

Strong families and communities are fundamental to the success of Indigenous peoples. The Government will work in partnership with Indigenous peoples to break down the barriers that have for too long held back individuals and communities from reaching their full potential. This will benefit the broader Canadian economy.

Budget 2016 also delivers on the Government’s commitments to help all Canadians retire with security and dignity and to provide veterans with the support and care they deserve in return for the sacrifices that they have made for their country, and reinforces the Government’s commitment to work with provinces and territories to enhance the Canada Pension Plan.

At the same time, Canadians want to feel safe in their homes, online and in their communities. Budget 2016 introduces measures that will help protect Canadians by ensuring public safety officers have the necessary equipment and facilities to investigate serious crime, and to enhance our understanding of radicalization at home.

Finally, Canadians are proud of their country and its place in the world. Budget 2016 will support important national institutions, safeguard our two official languages and promote industries that highlight Canada’s culture.

Investing in the Canadian cultural sector helps to create jobs, strengthens the economy and ensures that the unique Canadian perspective is shared with the world.

“The Government’s agenda reflects that Canada’s strength is its diversity. Canadians elected a government to bring us together, not to set us against one another. Canada is strong because of our differences, not in spite of them. As a country, we are strengthened in many ways: by our shared experiences, by the diversity that inspires both Canada and the world, and by the way that we treat each other.”

$3.4 billion dollars over five years to lift low-income single seniors out of poverty with a significant increase to Guaranteed Income Supplement top-up benefits.

$2.6 billion over five years to improve primary and secondary education for First Nations children living on reserve.

Nearly $1 billion over five years to build and renovate schools on reserve to foster better learning environments for children on reserve.

Nearly $635 million over five years to strengthen the on reserve child welfare system.

$1.2 billion over five years as part of the first phase of the Government’s 10-year plan to create inclusive growth in Indigenous and northern communities, including in early learning and child care and housing, as well as investments in other community infrastructure on reserve.

$2.2 billion over five years in water and wastewater treatment and waste management as part of the first phase of the Government’s 10-year green infrastructure investment plan.

Significant improvements to the financial security of our veterans, who have given so much in the service of Canada.

$1.9 billion over five years to support Canadian arts and culture organizations and cultural infrastructure, including the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation/Radio-Canada and national museums.

National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls

The number of missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls is a national tragedy. On December 8, 2015, the Government announced its intention to launch a national inquiry into the unacceptable overrepresentation of Indigenous women and girls as victims of violence. Budget 2016 will allocate $40 million over two years toward the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls.

Primary and Secondary Education for First Nations Children

Improving the education outcomes of First Nations children living on reserve is critical to improving their quality of life and contributing to stronger communities. Budget 2016 will make substantial investments in primary and secondary education on reserve, totalling $2.6 billion over five years. This includes funding to address immediate needs and to keep pace with cost growth over the medium term. It also includes investments in language and cultural programming.

Better Learning Environments in First Nations Schools

The academic achievement of First Nations children, as well as their health and well-being, depends in large part on the quality of their schools. There is a significant need to repair and construct schools on reserve and ensure that they are adequately maintained. Budget 2016 will invest $969.4 million over five years in First Nations education infrastructure on reserve.

Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy

The Aboriginal Skills and Employment Training Strategy helps Indigenous peoples in all regions of the country to develop workplace skills and pursue training. Budget 2016 will invest $15 million over two years to launch a pilot project that provides opportunities for Indigenous peoples to train for jobs that support their communities, including in housing construction, water treatment and local administration.

Social Infrastructure

Quality housing, access to early learning and child care, health care, and cultural and recreational infrastructure can contribute to improving the quality of life of First Nations and Inuit communities. Over the next five years, the Government will invest $1.2 billion in support of social infrastructure in First Nations, Inuit and Northern communities.

Northern and Inuit Housing

The need for affordable housing is also particularly high in the North and Inuit communities. Budget 2016 will provide up to $177.7 million over two years to provinces and territories through the Investment in Affordable Housing initiative to address urgent housing needs in these regions.

Support for Veterans

Budget 2016 will: enhance financial benefits for modern-day veterans by increasing the Disability Award for injuries or illnesses resulting from or worsened by military service; better support veterans who have had their job prospects limited by a service-related illness or injury; and increase the Earnings Loss Benefit to provide income replacement of 90 per cent of gross pre-release military salary for injured veterans participating in Veterans Affairs Canada’s rehabilitation or vocational assistance program or with injuries preventing them from suitable and gainful employment.

These measures represent a significant investment that will help support disabled veterans, including veterans transitioning to the civilian workforce and those with injuries that prevent them from getting a good job. These measures will ensure that disabled veterans who are unable to return to work because of their injuries receive higher lifelong financial support.

Strengthening Canada’s Health Care System

The Government is committed to working in partnership with provinces and territories to negotiate a new multi-year health accord that will improve health care in Canada and boost health outcomes for all Canadians. Discussions with the provinces and territories have begun to enhance the affordability and accessibility of prescription drugs, improve access to home care and mental health services, and support pan-Canadian innovation in the delivery of health services.

Budget 2016 announces initiatives that will help Canadians maintain and improve their health, including through expanding access to nutritious food in the North, enhancing food safety, providing funding for specific men’s and women’s health initiatives, improving vaccine uptake and coverage, and investing in concussion protocols.

Increasing the Guaranteed Income Supplement for Single Seniors

Budget 2016 will increase the Guaranteed Income Supplement top-up benefit by up to $947 annually for single seniors starting in July 2016, which will support those seniors who rely almost exclusively on Old Age Security and Guaranteed Income Supplement benefits and may therefore be at risk of experiencing financial difficulties. Budget 2016 also confirms that the eligibility age of Old Age Security will be restored to 65.

Enhancing Food Safety in Canada

An effective and reliable food safety system protects the health of Canadians and supports foreign consumer confidence and demand for Canadian agri-food products. Budget 2016 will provide $38.5 million over two years, on a cash basis, to further strengthen and modernize Canada’s food safety system.

Enhancing the Safety of Railways and the Transportation of Dangerous Goods

Canadians expect industry and government to take action to reduce the risks associated with the movement of goods by rail through their neighbourhoods. Budget 2016 will provide up to $143 million over three years to sustain existing measures and support new and expanded activities to strengthen oversight and enforcement, and to enhance prevention and response capabilities related to rail safety and the transportation of dangerous goods.

Investing in Arts and Cultural Organizations

Investing in Canadian cultural and creative industries allows Canadian artists to share their stories at home and abroad. Budget 2016 provides $1.9 billion over five years to support longstanding arts and cultural organizations and cultural infrastructure, including $675 million to the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation/Radio-Canada and $550 million to the Canada Council for the Arts over five years.



<<< source: world-monde-en.html >>>

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

Canada in the World International leadership in support of peace, security and economic growth

Expanding Immigration

Canadians are known for their generosity, compassion and acceptance. In part, this is because Canada’s cultural diversity and economic vitality have been enriched as more people have chosen Canada as their home. This year, the Government intends to admit 300,000 new permanent residents—the highest in over a hundred years when people were fleeing the hardships and conflicts that led to the First World War.

Canada’s diversity and connections to the world are among its greatest assets and contribute to growing the middle class. We all benefit by welcoming people to Canada to create better lives for themselves and their families.

Budget 2016 proposes to reduce processing times and make family reunification a priority of Canada’s immigration system. In addition, Budget 2016 proposes to increase funding for settlement programs to better welcome newcomers to their new home in Canada.

While Canada is being strengthened by people from around the world seeking a new life, outside threats remain a reality. To mitigate those threats, the Government will work to safeguard the health and safety of all Canadians, and promote security and stability globally.

The Government is also taking steps to return Canada to its place on the world stage as an engaged international citizen, supportive of a safer and more prosperous world, by investing in international development and peace and security programs.

Increasing Canada’s International Assistance Envelope (IAE) to over $5 billion on a cash basis by 2018–19. This includes new funding to the IAE to address emerging international priorities, funding provided for Canada’s approach in Iraq, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon, and climate finance.

Resettling an additional 10,000 government-assisted Syrian refugees in 2016, and reducing immigration processing times to help reunite families faster.

Supporting those who defend Canada and promote peace by renewing major equipment for the Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) and improving facilities where CAF members live, work and train.

International Re-engagement

This Government is committed to strengthening Canada’s place in the world by re-energizing its efforts to engage with the United Nations and other international partners. This will lead to improved trade, economic growth and support for those who need it most such as the middle class and those working hard to join it.

Defending Canada

A modern and well-equipped Canadian Armed Forces is needed to ensure the security of Canadians and to contribute to international peace and security. To ensure that funding is available when key capital acquisitions will be made, the Government will reallocate funding of $3.716 billion for large-scale capital projects from the 2015–16 to 2020–21 period to future years. This funding is being shifted into future years to align with the timing of major equipment acquisitions.

Through Budget 2016, the Government will also undertake infrastructure projects at Canadian Armed Forces Bases and other defence properties across Canada to ensure that personnel and their families have the support they need, including safe and modern facilities in which to live, work and train.

The Government will conduct an open and transparent process to create a new defence strategy that will deliver a modern, more agile, better-equipped military. Over the course of 2016, the Government will seek the input of Canadians, experts, allies and partners, and Parliament on a new defence strategy.

The Government has committed $5 billion to re-engage with the world. These measures demostrate that a more peaceful and prosperous world can only be obtained through a long-term vision. Previously annouced measures include:

Climate change—Helping developing countries address climate change by providing $2.65 billion on a cash basis by 2020;

International re-engagement—Improving security, stability, and humanitarian and development assistance in Iraq, Syria, Jordan and Lebanon by providing more than $1.6 billion over three years, starting in 2016–2017;

Refugee settlement—Helping resettle 25,000 Syrian refugees in Canada by providing $678 million over six years, starting in 2015–2016; and

Humanitarian crisis—Responding to the humanitarian crisis in Iraq and Syria by providing $100 million in 2015–2016 to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, to help support critical relief activities in the region.

Expanding Immigration

Canada’s history has been shaped by immigration. Immigrants bring unique cultures and perspectives, and make distinctive contributions to Canadian society and the economy. That is why the Government recently announced a target of 300,000 for permanent resident admissions in 2016. With this new target level, Canada will reunite families, offer a place of refuge to those fleeing persecution and support Canada’s long-term economic prosperity. Budget 2016 builds on this commitment by demonstrating continued leadership with respect to the Syrian refugee crisis and by making family reunification a priority under Canada’s immigration policy.

Expanding Canada’s Intake of Syrian Refugees

Canadians have been deeply affected by the refugee crisis in Syria and the surrounding region, and have expressed the desire to help. In November 2015, the Government showed leadership by committing $678 million over six years, starting in 2015–2016, to resettle 25,000 Syrian refugees by February 29, 2016, and by committing to resettle an additional 10,000 government-assisted Syrian refugees over the course of 2016. Budget 2016 will provide $245 million over five years for the identification, overseas processing, transportation and resettlement of the additional 10,000 Syrian refugees.



<<< source: open-transparent-ouvert-en.html >>>

To access a Portable Document Format (PDF) file you must have a PDF reader installed. If you do not already have such a reader, there are numerous PDF readers available for free download or for purchase on the Internet.

Open and Transparent Government Making government more open, enhancing tax fairness and investing for long-term growth

Open and Transparent

Canadians expect their government to be open, honest and transparent. They expect their government to represent their interests and deliver the services they need quickly and effectively. Above all, Canadians expect their government to deliver real, meaningful results while ensuring that their tax dollars are spent fairly, efficiently and responsibly.

Canadians have high standards for the services they receive. Canadians expect high-quality services delivered in a way that makes them feel respected and valued. Dealing with the government should not be an exception to this. Budget 2016 will bring real change to how government works so that it better reflects the values and expectations of Canadians. In doing this, the Government will improve client services at Canada Revenue Agency, it will take important steps toward evolving online services available through Canada.ca, and it will set out new performance standards to promote a better client experience for Canadians when they interact with the Government. The Government will also improve Employment Insurance service delivery so that Canadians receive the benefits to which they are entitled in a timely manner.

Tax Fairness

As a matter of fairness for all taxpayers, the Government is committed to preventing underground economic activity, tax evasion and aggressive tax planning. That is why Budget 2016 provides increased resources to ensure more effective administration and enforcement of tax laws. Budget 2016 also proposes actions to improve the integrity of Canada’s tax system, on both the international and domestic fronts, to give Canadians greater confidence that the system is fair to everyone.

Canada’s Fiscal Strength

The Government will make necessary investments in growing and strengthening the middle class, and help those working hard to join it. The Government has the capacity and the willingness to act, and there is growing international support for its approach.

“The trust Canadians have in public institutions—including Parliament—has, at times, been compromised. By working with greater openness and transparency, Parliament can restore it.”

“As Minister of Finance, your overarching goal will be to use the fiscal and budgeting tools at our disposal to implement our New Plan for a Strong Middle Class. That plan is grounded in the understanding that a healthy economy starts with a strong and growing middle class and that we must invest to strengthen the middle class and those working hard to join it. Canadians have elected us on our commitment to invest to create sustainable growth and economic opportunity for more Canadians. You are expected to lead the fiscal implementation of our plan and ensure that we create good quality jobs and improve economic opportunity and security for Canadians.”

“Governments in many countries are currently able to borrow for long periods at very low interest rates, which in effect increases fiscal space. Many countries have room for fiscal expansion to strengthen demand. This should focus on policies with strong short-run benefits and that also contribute to long-term growth.”

The Government is wholly committed to openness and fairness. To that end, Budget 2016 will improve direct services to Canadians and create client-focused products and services that give Canadians more of the information and services they need more easily, and with fewer delays.

On December 7, 2015, as one of its first actions, the Government delivered on its commitment to strengthen the middle class by introducing a middle class tax cut. In total, nearly 9 million Canadians are now benefiting from this tax cut. With more money in their pockets, Canadians will be able to save, invest and spend more, thus boosting economic activity in the short term, and putting Canada on a solid growth path over the long term.

Budget 2016 will also give Canadian families more money to help with the cost of raising their children, by replacing the current complicated child benefit system with the new Canada Child Benefit. The Benefit will be simpler, tax-free, better-targeted and much more generous, with families benefiting seeing an average increase in child benefits of almost $2,300 in the 2016–17 benefit year.

Canadians want services delivered in a way that makes them feel respected and valued. Budget 2016 will provide $185.8 million over five years, and $14.6 million ongoing, to the Canada Revenue Agency to improve client services.

To make it easier for Canadians to access government information, including their personal information, the Government will create a simple, central website where Canadians can submit requests to any government institution, backed up with a 30-day guarantee for personal information requests.

To help ensure that all taxpayers pay their fair share, Budget 2016 provides increased resources to ensure more effective administration and enforcement of tax laws, and proposes actions to improve the integrity of Canada’s tax system.



<<< source: nwmm-amvm-2-en.html >>>

Notice of Ways and Means Motions

Notice of Ways and Means Motion to Amend the Excise Tax Act



<<< source: nwmm-amvm-3-en.html >>>

Notice of Ways and Means Motions

Notice of Ways and Means Motion to amend the Excise Tax Act, the Excise Act, 2001 and Other Tax Legislation



<<< source: nwmm-amvm-4-en.html >>>

Notice of Ways and Means Motions

Draft Amendments to Various GST/HST Regulations



<<< source: notes-en.html >>>

Explanatory Notes - Eligible Capital Property

These explanatory notes describe  proposed amendments to the Income Tax Act ,  the Excise Tax Act and related  legislation. These explanatory notes describe these proposed amendments, clause  by clause, for the Notice of Ways and Means Motions, for the assistance of  Members of Parliament, taxpayers and their professional advisors. In these  explanatory notes, references to clause numbers are to the respective clause  numbers in the Notice of Ways and Means Motion to Amend the Income Tax Act and Other Tax Legislation,  in the Notice of Ways and Means Motion to Amend the Excise Tax Act and in the Draft Amendments to Various GST/HST  Regulations .

These notes are intended for  information purposes only and should not be construed as an official  interpretation of the provisions they describe.

Amendments to the Income Tax Act and  Related Legislation

Overview

The eligible capital property (ECP)  rules in section 14 of the Income Tax Act (the Act) govern the tax treatment of certain expenditures (outlays and  expenses described in the definition “eligible capital expenditure” in  subsection 14(5)) and receipts (amounts described by E in the definition  “cumulative eligible capital” in subsection 14(5)) that are not otherwise  accounted for as business revenues or expenses, or under the rules relating to  capital property.

The ECP rules are repealed and replaced  by new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income  Tax Regulations (the Regulations), effective on January 1, 2017. Property  that was ECP will be depreciable property and expenditures and receipts that  were accounted for under the ECP rules will be accounted for under the rules  for depreciable property and capital property. These changes are discussed  below as if the changes have come into effect.

Depreciation

New Class 14.1 generally includes goodwill,  property that was ECP before January 1, 2017 and property acquired on or after January  1, 2017, the cost of which would be treated as an eligible capital expenditure  under the ECP rules. The full cost of property of the new class acquired after January  1, 2017 is added to the undepreciated capital cost (UCC) of the class, instead  of only 75% of the cost being added to cumulative eligible capital (CEC) under  the ECP rules.

To account for the increase in the  portion of the cost of property that is allowed to be depreciated from 75% to  100%, new subparagraph 1100(1)( a )(xii.1)  of the Regulations provides that capital cost allowance in respect of the new  class may be taken at 5% on a declining balance basis under paragraph 20(1)( a ) of the Act, instead of 7% on a  declining balance basis under former paragraph 20(1)( b ).

Subsection 1101(1) of the Regulations  provides for a separate class in respect of each business of a taxpayer. This  is consistent with the ECP rules, which provided for a separate CEC pool in  respect of each business of a taxpayer. As a result, there is a separate new Class  14.1 in respect of each CEC pool of a taxpayer.

Recapture

Amounts deducted in respect of property  of the new class under paragraph 20(1)( a )  are subject to recapture under subsection 13(1) of the Act. The reduction in  the UCC of the class from the disposition of property is generally equal to the  lesser of the proceeds of disposition of the property and the capital cost of  the property. The amount of any negative UCC balance is included in income  under subsection 13(1) as recapture.

Taxation of gains

Gains from the disposition of property  of the new class are taxable under subdivision c of Division B of Part I of the  Act. When a capital property is disposed of, the amount by which the proceeds  of disposition exceed the cost of the property generally results in a capital  gain, 50% of which is included in income as a taxable capital gain.

Expenditures and receipts not related  to property

The definition “property” in subsection  248(1) of the Act is broad and includes, for example, a right of any kind  whatever. As a result, most, but not all, expenditures and receipts that would  be eligible capital expenditures or eligible capital receipts under the ECP  rules relate to the acquisition or disposition of a property and, consequently,  such amounts result in an adjustment to the UCC of the new CCA class when the  property is acquired or disposed of.

New subsections 13(34) to (36) of the  Act provide special rules for expenditures and receipts of a business that do  not relate to property and that would adjust the CEC of the business under the  ECP rules. Such an expenditure or receipt is accounted for by adjusting the  capital cost of the goodwill of the business. Subsection 13(34) provides that every  business is considered to have goodwill property associated with it, even if  there has not been an expenditure to acquire goodwill. Subsections 13(34) and  (35) provide that an expenditure that does not relate to property increases the  capital cost of the goodwill of a business and, consequently, the UCC of the  new CCA class.

Subsections 13(34) and (36) provide  that a receipt that does not relate to property reduces the capital cost of the  goodwill of a business and, consequently, the UCC of the new CCA class, by the  lesser of the capital cost of the goodwill (which could be nil) and the amount  of the receipt. If the amount of the receipt exceeds the capital cost of the  goodwill, the excess results in a capital gain. Previously deducted  depreciation is recaptured to the extent that the reduction to the capital cost  of goodwill results in a negative UCC balance.

Transitional rules – additional depreciation

New subparagraph 1100(1)( c.1 )(i) of the Regulations provides  that, for taxation years that end before 2027, the depreciation rate for the  new CCA class is 7 per cent in respect of expenditures incurred before January  1, 2017 instead of the 5 per cent provided by new subparagraph 1100(1)( a )(xii.1).

Transitional rules – undepreciated capital cost balance

New paragraphs 13(37)( a ) to ( d ) generally provide that the UCC of the new class in respect of a  business at the beginning of January 1, 2017 is equal to the amount that would have  been the CEC balance in respect of the business at the beginning of January 1,  2017.

First,  paragraph 13(37)( a ) deems the total  capital cost of all property in Class 14.1 at the beginning of that day to be,  generally, 4/3 of the total of the amount that would have been the CEC balance at  the beginning of that day and past depreciation claimed under paragraph 20(1)( b ) that has not been recaptured before  that day.

Second,  paragraph 13(37)( b ) provides rules  for allocating that total capital cost as between goodwill property and each  identifiable property in the new class that was an eligible capital property.

Third,  paragraph 13(37)( c ) deems an amount  to have been allowed as capital cost allowance under paragraph 20(1)( a ) before January 1, 2017, such that the  UCC balance at the beginning of January 1, 2017 is equal to the amount that  would have been the CEC balance at the beginning of January 1, 2017.

The determination of the total capital  cost and the allocation of the capital cost of each property that was an  eligible capital property before January 1, 2017 is relevant to the calculation  of recaptured capital cost allowance and capital gain in respect of the  disposition of such a property on or after January 1, 2017. It is not necessary  to determine the total capital cost, or to allocate a capital cost to each  property, to determine the amount that may be deducted under 20(1)( a ) in respect of the new class.

Transitional rules – deemed gain immediately before January  1, 2017

Paragraph 13(37)( d ) provides rules for including an amount in a taxpayer’s income in  a taxation year that straddles January 1, 2017. The amount of the income  inclusion, if any, is relevant to the calculation of the final CEC balance for  the purpose of determining the total capital cost of the class under paragraph  13(37)( a ). An income inclusion may be  required, for instance, if a taxpayer receives proceeds in that taxation year  and prior to January 1, 2017, such that there would have been an income  inclusion under paragraph 14(1)( b ) if  the taxation year had instead ended immediately before January 1, 2017. A  taxpayer may choose to have the income inclusion reported as business income or  as a taxable capital gain.

An election to defer this income  inclusion is available in a manner that is conceptually similar to the manner  in which income inclusions could be deferred under the ECP rules. Where, on or  after January 1, 2017 and in that taxation year the taxpayer acquires a  property of the new class or is deemed by subsection 13(35) to have acquired  goodwill, the taxpayer may elect to reduce the income inclusion under paragraph  13(37)( d ), by up to half of the  capital cost of the new property. In this case, the capital cost of the new  property is then reduced by twice the amount by which the income inclusion is reduced.

Transitional rules – Dispositions of former ECP

New subsection 13(38) is intended to  ensure that receipts related to expenditures incurred before January 1, 2017 do  not result in excess recapture when applied to reduce the balance of the new  CCA class. Subsection 13(38) provides, in effect, that certain qualifying  receipts reduce the UCC of the new CCA class at a 75% rate (the rate at which  eligible capital expenditures were added to CEC). Receipts that qualify for the  75% rate are generally receipts from the disposition of a property that was an ECP  and receipts that do not represent the proceeds of disposition of property.  This is achieved by increasing the UCC of the new  class by, generally, 25% of the lesser of the proceeds of disposition and the  cost of the property disposed of.

Transitional rules – Non-arm’s length dispositions of former  ECP

Although subsection 13(38) increases  the UCC balance of the new class for, generally, 25% of the proceeds of  disposition of property that was ECP before January 1, 2017, new subsection 13(39)  is intended to prevent the use of non-arm’s length transfers to increase the  amount that can be depreciated in respect of the new class. Subsection 13(39)  generally provides that where a taxpayer acquires a property of the new class, in  effect only 3/4 of the capital cost of the property is included in the UCC in  respect of the class if

the  property or a similar property was previously an eligible capital property of  the taxpayer or a person or partnership not dealing at arm’s length with the  taxpayer; and

subsection  13(38) applied to increase the UCC in respect of an earlier disposition of the  property or similar property by the taxpayer or the non-arm’s length person or  partnership.

This effect is achieved by deeming the  taxpayer to have claimed CCA in respect of the new class equal to the lesser of  1/4 of the cost of the property acquired and the amount that was deemed by  subsection 13(38) to have been added to the UCC of the new class of the  taxpayer or another person or partnership.

Consequential Amendments

The provisions relating to ECP are  specifically referenced in various income tax rules. A number of amendments to  various Income Tax Act provisions will  be required consequential to the repeal of the ECP rules and the creation of  new Class 14.1 of depreciable property. The Notice of Ways and Means Motion  contains provisions relating to the main substantive  proposals for the transition from the ECP regime to the CCA regime, and does  not include proposals in respect of less substantive consequential amendments. These  notes list the anticipated consequential amendment proposals below. Explanatory  notes are provided below in respect of consequential amendments related to the  Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax, which are intended to provide that  the application of the Goods and Services Tax/Harmonized Sales Tax in this area  is not affected.

Income  Tax Act

Clause 63

Depreciable property

ITA 13

Section 13 of the Act provides rules  relating to depreciable property. As a result of the repeal of the eligible  capital property rules in section 14 of the Act and the creation of new Class 14.1  of depreciable property under section 1100 of the Income Tax Regulations , property that was previously eligible  capital property is depreciable property in new Class 14.1 and the rules in  section 13 apply to this property on and after January 1, 2017. As with the  eligible capital property rules, there is a separate expenditure pool in  respect of each business of a taxpayer. Each cumulative eligible capital pool  of a taxpayer will be replaced by a new undepreciated capital cost pool.

New subsections 13(34) to (36) provide  rules relating to goodwill and expenditure and receipts that do not relate to  property. New subsections 13(37) to (40) provide transitional rules.

Goodwill

ITA 13(34)

Subsection 13(34) of the Act ensures  that the determination of whether a property is depreciable property is made  before determining whether the cost of the property is eligible for deduction  under sections 66 to 66.4, applicable to taxation years that end after 1987 and  before December 6, 1996. Paragraph 1102(1)( a )  of the Income Tax Regulations provides  the same result for taxation years that end after December 5, 1996.

Subsection 13(34) is replaced as of January  1, 2017.

Consequential on the repeal of the ECP  rules and the creation of new Class 14.1 of depreciable property, new  subsection 13(34) provides rules for determining the cost of goodwill acquired  and disposed of.  It is necessary to  determine the cost of the goodwill of a business in order to calculate capital  gains, the undepreciated capital cost balance of the new class, and the  recapture of depreciation previously claimed.

Subsection 13(34) is intended to  recognize that goodwill is not a separately identifiable property and can only  be disposed of as part of the sale of a business as a going concern. The  definition “property” in subsection 248(1) is concurrently amended to provide  that the goodwill of a business is property for the purposes of the Act.  Goodwill is also included in new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations .

The combined effect of subsections  13(34) to (36) and the existing rules relating to depreciable property includes  the following:

Each  identifiable property included in the new class has the cost that is  identifiable (as applies to other depreciable property).

Capital  expenditures that do not relate to an identifiable property (or that are to  acquire goodwill) are pooled into the cost of a single goodwill property of the  business.

If  a taxpayer receives a capital receipt that does not relate to an identifiable  property:

the  receipt is deemed to be the proceeds of disposition of a portion of the  goodwill property of the business;

the  cost of the property disposed of is the cost in the pool (not exceeding the  amount of the proceeds); and

where  the taxpayer continues to carry on the remaining business, the taxpayer is  deemed to still have a goodwill property in respect of the business, but the  new cost of that property (if any) is the old cost less the proceeds just  received.

In particular,  paragraph 13(34)( a ) deems there to be  a single goodwill property in respect of a particular business.

Paragraph 13(34)( b ) provides that if a taxpayer who  carries on a particular business acquires goodwill as part of the acquisition  of another business that is carried on, after the acquisition, as part of the  particular business (or if the taxpayer is deemed by new subsection 13(35) to  acquire goodwill in respect of the particular business), the cost of the goodwill  acquired is added to the cost of the goodwill in respect of the particular business.  That is, a taxpayer is considered to own a single goodwill property in respect  of a business, and if goodwill is acquired as a result of a business  acquisition (such that the second business becomes part of the first), the  taxpayer still has only one goodwill property in respect of the continuing  business.

Paragraph  13(34)( c ) provides that if a taxpayer  who carries on a particular business

is deemed by subsection 13(36) to dispose of goodwill  in respect of the particular business, or

disposes of goodwill as part of the sale of a portion  of the particular business, receives proceeds of disposition a portion of which  is attributable to goodwill, and continues to carry on the remaining business,

then:

the taxpayer is deemed to have disposed of a portion  of the goodwill in respect of the particular business having a cost equal to the  lesser of the cost of the single goodwill property in respect of the particular  business and the proceeds attributable to goodwill, and

the cost of the goodwill property in respect of the  particular business is reduced by the amount determined to be the cost of the  portion of the goodwill disposed of.

This recognizes  that a taxpayer may sell a portion of a business and receive proceeds in  respect of goodwill. However, if the remaining business continues the taxpayer  still has a goodwill property in respect of that business.

If a taxpayer  makes more than one disposition of goodwill at the same time, paragraph 13(34)( d ) provides that paragraph 13(34)( c ) and subsection 13(38) apply as if  each disposition had occurred separately. Subsection 13(38) provides a  transitional rule that may apply to increase a taxpayer’s undepreciated capital  cost when the taxpayer disposes of certain property included in new Class 14.1.

Example

A taxpayer acquires a business and as  part of the acquisition, the taxpayer acquires goodwill at a cost of $100.  The $100 is added to the undepreciated capital  cost of new Class 14.1 in respect of the business.

After a few years, the taxpayer decides  to expand his business by acquiring a new business.  The new business is not carried on as separate  business but is combined with the existing business. As part of the acquisition  of the new business, the taxpayer acquires goodwill at a cost of $200.  Paragraph 13(34)(a) deems the taxpayer to have a single goodwill property in  respect of the business and paragraph 13(34)(b) provides that the cost of that  single goodwill property is $300 (i.e., $100+$200).  As well, $200 is added to the undepreciated  capital cost of new Class 14.1 in respect of the business, resulting in an  undepreciated capital cost of $300 (assuming no deductions have been taken  under paragraph 20(1)(a)).

After a few more years, the taxpayer  decides to sell a portion of the business.

Scenario 1

As part of the sale, the taxpayer  receives proceeds from the sale of goodwill of $50. Paragraph 13(34)(c) provides  that the cost of the goodwill disposed of is $50, which is the lesser of the  cost of the single goodwill property in respect of the business ($300) and the  proceeds from the disposition of the goodwill disposed of ($50). This results  in a $50 reduction in the undepreciated capital cost balance, resulting in an  undepreciated capital cost of $250 (assuming no deductions have been taken  under paragraph 20(1)(a)). As well, the cost of the goodwill of the remaining  business is reduced by $50, resulting in a cost of $250 (i.e., $300-$50).

Scenario 2

The taxpayer instead receives proceeds  from the sale of goodwill of $500.  Paragraph  13(34)(c) provides that the cost of the goodwill disposed of is $300 (the  lesser of the cost of the single goodwill property ($300) and the proceeds of  the goodwill disposed of ($500)).  This  results in a $300 reduction of the undepreciated capital cost balance (to nil) and  a $200 capital gain.  As well, the cost  of the single goodwill property of the remaining business is reduced by $300,  to nil.

Scenario 3

The taxpayer disposes of two portions  of the business at the same time, and receives proceeds of $500 from two  dispositions of goodwill (one for proceeds of $50 and one for proceeds of $450).   Paragraph 13(34)(d) allows the taxpayer  to designate the order in which the goodwill is disposed of for the purposes of  paragraph 13(34)(c). If the taxpayer designates the $50 goodwill to have been  disposed of first, there is

(i) a $50 reduction of the  undepreciated capital cost balance from that disposition (and the remaining  goodwill now has a cost of $250); and

(ii) an additional $250 reduction of  the undepreciated capital cost balance from the other disposition.  On this second disposition there is also a  $200 capital gain, being the difference between the $450 proceeds and the $250  cost of the remaining goodwill property.

A similar result would occur if the  taxpayer designated the $450 portion to have been disposed of first, except  that there would be two capital gains: $150 for the first, and $50 for the  second.

In either case, if the taxpayer  continues to carry on the remaining business, the new cost of the goodwill  property in respect of the remaining business would be nil.

Outlays not relating to property

ITA 13(35)

New subsection 13(35) of the Act deems  a taxpayer to have acquired goodwill in respect of a business with a cost equal  to the amount of certain capital expenditures incurred in respect of the  business. The language in subsection 13(35) is based in principle on the  definition “eligible capital expenditure” in former subsection 14(5). A main  difference is that subsection 13(35) does not apply to expenditures to acquire  property.

Property (for example, customer lists  and licences, franchise rights and farm quotas of indefinite duration), the  cost of which would previously have been treated as an eligible capital expenditure,  is generally included in new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations . Goodwill that is  acquired, i.e. when a business is acquired, is a property that is included in  new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income  Tax Regulations .  This is distinguishable  from the deemed acquisition of goodwill under subsection 13(35), which relates  to capital expenditures that are not incurred to acquire an identifiable  property. However, the cost of goodwill deemed acquired under subsection 13(35)  is added to the cost of the single goodwill property of the business as a  result of new subsection 13(34), and to the undepreciated capital cost of the  class in respect of the business as a result of variable A of the definition  “undepreciated capital cost” in subsection 13(21).

Subject to paragraphs 13(35)( a ) to ( e ), subsection 13(35) provides that if a taxpayer makes or incurs  an outlay or expense, at any time on or after January 1, 2017, on account of  capital for the purpose of gaining or producing income from a business carried  on by the taxpayer, the taxpayer is deemed to acquire property at that time  that is goodwill in respect of the business with a cost equal to the amount of  the outlay or expense. (As with eligible capital expenditures, subsection  13(35) does not apply to an outlay or expense that is made for the purpose of  gaining or producing income from property.)

Paragraphs 13(35)( a ) to ( e ) provide conditions  that must be met in order for subsection 13(35) to apply to an outlay or  expense.

Paragraph 13(35)( a ) provides that subsection 13(35) does not apply to an outlay or  expense if any portion of the amount is the cost, or any part of the cost of  property. In order for the cost of property to be added to the undepreciated  capital cost of the new class, the property must be prescribed in Class 14.1 of  Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations .

Paragraph 13(35)( b ) provides that subsection 13(35) does not apply to an outlay or  expense if any portion of the amount would be deductible in computing the  taxpayer’s income from the business if subsection 13(35) did not apply.

Paragraph 13(35)( c ) provides that subsection 13(35) does not apply to an outlay or  expense if any portion of the amount is not deductible in computing the  taxpayer’s income from the business because of any provision of the Act (other  than paragraph 18(1)( b )) or the Income Tax Regulations . An outlay or  expense that is made or incurred for the purpose of gaining or producing exempt  income, for example, does not meet the condition in paragraph 13(35)( b ) since the deduction of such an outlay  or expense is specifically not deductible because of paragraph 18(1)( c ).

Paragraph 13(35)( d ) provides that subsection 13(35) does not apply to an outlay or  expense if any portion of the amount is paid or payable to a creditor of the  taxpayer as, on account of or in lieu of payment of, any debt, or on account of  the redemption, cancellation or purchase of any bond or debenture.

Paragraph 13(35)( e ) provides that subsection 13(35) does not apply to an outlay or  expense if any portion of the amount is, where the taxpayer is a corporation,  partnership or trust, paid or payable to a person as a shareholder, partner or  beneficiary, as the case may be, of the taxpayer.

Subsection 13(35) comes into force on January  1, 2017.

Receipts not relating to property

ITA 13(36)

Subsection 13(36) deems a taxpayer to  dispose of goodwill for proceeds equal to the amount of certain capital amounts  received in respect of a business. The language in subsection 13(36) is based  in principle on variable E of the definition “cumulative eligible capital” in  former subsection 14(5). A main difference is that subsection 13(36) does not  generally apply to proceeds from the disposition of property.

Subsection 13(36) does not apply to  proceeds of disposition of property that is goodwill from the sale of a  business as a going concern. Goodwill is deemed to be property under amended  subsection 248(1).  Proceeds from  goodwill are subject to rules that apply generally to the disposition of  depreciable property.

Goodwill is included in new Class 14.1  of Schedule II to the Income Tax  Regulations . The deemed disposition of goodwill under subsection 13(36) can  result in a decrease in the undepreciated capital cost of the class in respect  of the business as a result of new subsection 13(34) and variable F of the  definition “undepreciated capital cost” in subsection 13(21).

Subject to paragraphs 13(36)( a ) to ( c ), subsection 13(36) provides that if a taxpayer has or may become  entitled to receive an amount on account of capital in respect of a business  carried on or formerly carried on by the taxpayer, the taxpayer is deemed to  dispose of goodwill of the business for proceeds of disposition equal to the  amount by which the amount the taxpayer has or may become entitled to receive  exceeds all outlays or expenses that were not otherwise deductible in computing  the taxpayer’s income and were made or incurred by the taxpayer for the purpose  of obtaining the amount.

Paragraphs 13(36)( a ) to ( c ) provide conditions  that must be met in order for subsection 13(36) to apply to a receipt.

Paragraph 13(36)( a ) provides that subsection 13(36) does not apply to an amount that  is included in computing the taxpayer’s income, or deducted in computing any  balance of undeducted outlays, expenses or other amounts for the year or a  preceding taxation year.

Paragraph 13(36)( b ) provides that subsection 13(36) does not apply to an amount that  reduces the cost or capital cost of a property or the amount of an outlay or  expense.

Paragraph 13(36)( c ) provides that subsection 13(36) does not apply to an amount that  is included in computing any gain or loss of the taxpayer from a disposition of  a capital property.

Subsection 13(36) comes into force on January  1, 2017.

Class 14.1 – transitional rules

ITA 13(37) to (40)

Overview

Subsection 13(37) to (40) provide  transitional rules that apply consequential on the repeal of the ECP rules and  the creation of new Class 14.1 of depreciable property.

Subsection 13(37) provides rules where  a taxpayer incurs an eligible capital expenditure in respect of a business  before January 1, 2017. Subsection 13(37) effectively transfers a taxpayer’s existing  cumulative eligible capital balance in respect of a business to the  undepreciated capital cost balance of the new class in respect of the business.

Paragraphs 13(37)( a ) to ( c ) generally  provide that the undepreciated capital cost of the new class in respect of a  business at the beginning of January 1, 2017 is equal to the amount that would  have been the cumulative eligible capital (CEC) balance in respect of the  business at the beginning of January 1, 2017.

First,  paragraph 13(37)( a ) deems the total  capital cost of all property in Class 14.1 at the beginning of that day to be,  generally, the total of 4/3 of the amount that would have been the CEC balance  at the beginning of that day and 4/3 of the amount of past depreciation claimed  under paragraph 20(1)( b ) that has not  been recaptured before that day.

Second,  paragraph 13(37)( b ) provides rules  for allocating that total capital cost as between goodwill property and each  identifiable property in the new class that was an eligible capital property.

Third,  paragraph 13(37)( c ) deems an amount  to have been allowed as capital cost allowance under paragraph 20(1)( a ) before January 1, 2017, such that the  UCC balance at the beginning of January 1, 2017 is equal to the amount that  would have been the CEC balance at the beginning of January 1, 2017.

For taxpayers with a taxation year that  straddles January 1, 2017 (i.e., no taxation year ends immediately before January  1, 2017), paragraph 13(37)( d ) also  provides for an income inclusion where there would be an income inclusion under  14(1)( b ) if the taxation year had  ended immediately before January 1, 2017. This income inclusion can be deferred  or offset in certain circumstances.

Subsection 13(38) provides that, where  certain property that was eligible capital property before January 1, 2017 is disposed  of on or after January 1, 2017, the undepreciated capital cost of the new class  is increased to prevent excess recapture as a result of the effective transfer  of the CEC pools under subsection 13(37).

Subsection 13(39) prevents the use of  subsection 13(38) to “step-up” the undepreciated capital cost of the new class  by means of a non-arm’s length transfer of property that was eligible capital  property before January 1, 2017. Subsection 13(39) provides that where such a  property is acquired by a taxpayer from a person that does not deal at arm’s  length with the taxpayer, the undepreciated capital cost of the new class is  decreased. Generally, subsection 13(39) applies to acquisitions of property,  the cost of which is attributable to an amount in respect of which subsection  13(38) applied.

Subsection 13(40) provides that, for  the purposes of subsections 13(37) to (39) and 40(13) to (16), the definitions  “cumulative eligible capital”, “eligible capital expenditure”, “eligible  capital property” and “exempt gains balance” have the same meanings that would  be assigned to those expressions if the Act read as it did immediately before January  1, 2017.

Deemed total capital cost

ITA 13(37)( a )

Paragraph 13(37)( a ) provides the total capital cost (at the beginning of January 1,  2017) of all property of a taxpayer included in Class 14.1 of Schedule II to  the Income Tax Regulations in respect  of the business, each of which was an eligible capital property of the taxpayer  immediately before January 1, 2017 or is the goodwill property in respect of  the business.

The total capital cost is important for  determining the amount of gains or recapture but is not required to be  calculated in order to determine the amount that may be deducted under 20(1)( a ) since the undepreciated capital cost  on January 1, 2017 will equal the amount that would be the cumulative eligible  capital on January 1, 2017.

At the beginning of January 1, 2017, the  total capital cost is deemed to be equal to the formula 4/3(A + B – C). The formula  is generally equal to the amount of receipts a taxpayer could have received  under the ECP rules without resulting in an income inclusion under paragraph  14(1)( b ).

Variable A is equal to the positive  balance, if any, of the taxpayer’s cumulative eligible capital in respect of  the business at the beginning of January 1, 2017. The positive balance of a  taxpayer’s undepreciated capital cost on January 1, 2017 is equal to the  positive balance of the taxpayer’s cumulative eligible capital on January 1,  2017.

Variable B is equal to the amount  determined for F in the definition “cumulative eligible capital” in former  subsection 14(5) at the beginning of January 1, 2017. This amount is generally  equal to the amount of deductions taken from the cumulative eligible capital  pool that have not been recaptured.

Variable C is equal to the negative  balance, if any, of the taxpayer’s cumulative eligible capital in respect of  the business at the beginning of January 1, 2017. The negative balance of a  taxpayer’s cumulative eligible capital is equal to the amount by which the  total of all amounts determined, in respect of the business, for E or F in the  definition “cumulative eligible capital” in former subsection 14(5), exceeds  the total of all amounts determined for A to D.1 in that definition in respect  of the business at the beginning of January 1, 2017. This amount includes any  adjustment required by subparagraph 13(37)( d )(i)  as a result of a deemed gain or income inclusion under paragraph 13(37)( d ). Variable C will generally only be  positive if a taxation year of the taxpayer straddles January 1, 2017 (i.e., no  taxation year ends immediately before January 1, 2017) and the taxpayer  receives an eligible capital amount in the taxation year and before January 1,  2017. A negative cumulative eligible capital balance will become the negative  undepreciated capital cost balance on January 1, 2017, the amount of which  generally result in recapture under subsection 13(1) at the end of the taxation  year unless amounts are added to the undepreciated capital cost of the class before  the end of the year (e.g., the taxpayer acquires a property of the new class).

Deemed capital cost of a property

ITA 13(37)( b )

Paragraph 13(37)( b ) deems the capital cost of each property of the taxpayer that is  included in the new class and that is goodwill in respect of the business or was  an eligible capital property of the taxpayer immediately before January 1, 2017.  The capital cost of these properties is relevant to the calculation of the  recapture of depreciation and capital gain upon the disposition of property of  the new class but is not required to be determined in order to calculate the  amount that can be deducted under paragraph 20(1)( a ) in respect of the class.

Subparagraph 13(37)( b )(i) provides that the taxpayer must  designate the order in which the capital cost of each property that is not the  goodwill property is determined, and that if the taxpayer does not designate an  order, the Minister may designate the order.

Subparagraph 13(37)( b )(ii) provides that the capital cost of  a particular property in respect of a business (other than goodwill) is deemed  to be the lesser of the eligible capital expenditure of the taxpayer in respect  of the particular property and the amount by which the total capital cost of  the class, as determined by paragraph 13(37)( a ), exceeds the total of all amounts each of which is an amount  deemed by subparagraph 13(37)( b )(ii) to  be the capital cost of a property that is determined in advance of the  determination of the capital cost of the particular property. This allows  taxpayers to assign available capital cost to each property in the order  designated under subparagraph 13(37)( b )(i).

Subparagraph 13(37)( b )(iii) deems the capital cost of the  goodwill property in respect of the business to be the amount by which the  total capital cost of the class exceeds the total of all amounts each of which  is an amount deemed by subparagraph 13(37)( b )(ii)  to be the capital cost of a property.   The capital cost of each property of the class (other than goodwill) in  respect of the business must be determined under 13(37)( b )(ii) before the capital cost of the goodwill property can be  determined.

Although the determination of the total  capital cost of the class under paragraph 13(37)( a ) and the capital cost of a particular property under paragraph  13(37)( b ) applies as of January 1,  2017, these determinations are generally not required to be calculated until  property of the class is disposed of, because the total capital cost and  individual capital costs are not required to be known in order to calculate the  undepreciated capital cost of the new class (and likewise the amount that is  allowed to be deducted under paragraph 20(1)( a )). This is because paragraph 13(37)( c ) ensures that the undepreciated capital cost of the new class at  the beginning of January 1, 2017 is equal to the amount that would be the cumulative  eligible capital balance in respect of the business at the beginning of January  1, 2017.

Example 1 – Deemed Capital Cost

Before January 1, 2017

In a taxation year ending before January  1, 2017, a taxpayer incurred an eligible capital expenditure of $100, resulting  in a cumulative eligible capital balance of $75 (i.e., 3/4 x $100), to acquire  a government licence of unlimited duration. In taxation years ending before January  1, 2017, the taxpayer deducted a total of $35 from cumulative eligible capital  under paragraph 20(1)(b), resulting in a cumulative eligible capital balance  of $40.

On January 1, 2017

The government licence and goodwill are  property included in new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations .

Paragraph  13(37)(a) provides that the total capital cost of property of the new class at  the beginning of January 1, 2017 that is goodwill or that was eligible capital  property before January 1, 2017 is 4/3 of the amount that would be the  cumulative eligible capital at the beginning of January 1, 2017; plus 4/3 of  the amount of deductions taken that have not been recaptured; less 4/3 of any  negative cumulative eligible capital balance at the beginning of January 1,  2017. The total capital cost of the class is equal to $100 (i.e., 4/3($40+$35-$0)). Subparagraph 13(37)(b)(ii) deems the capital cost of the government licence to  be $100 and subparagraph 13(37)(b)(iii) deems the capital cost of the goodwill  of the business to be nil.

Example 2 – Deemed Capital Cost

Before January 1, 2017

In a taxation year ending before January  1, 2017, a taxpayer incurred an eligible capital expenditure of $100 to acquire  a government licence of unlimited duration, an eligible capital expenditure of $150  to acquire a customer list and an eligible capital expenditure of $50 for  incorporation expenses, resulting in a cumulative eligible capital balance of  $225 (i.e., 3/4 x ($100+$150+$50)). In taxation years ending before January 1,  2017, the taxpayer deducted a total of $45 from cumulative eligible capital  under paragraph 20(1)(b), resulting in a cumulative eligible capital balance of  $180 (i.e., $225 – $45). Also in a taxation year ending before January 1, 2017,  the taxpayer disposed of the customer list for $112, resulting in a cumulative  eligible capital balance of $96 (i.e., $180 – 3/4($112)).

On January 1, 2017

The government licence and goodwill  would be property included in new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income Tax  Regulations. The customer list and the incorporation expenses would not be  property of the new class: the customer list was disposed of before January 1,  2017 and the incorporation expenses were not the cost of an acquisition  of property.

Paragraph 13(37)(a)  provides that the total capital cost of property of the new class at the  beginning of January 1, 2017 that is goodwill property or that was eligible  capital property before January 1, 2017 is 4/3 of the amount that would be the cumulative  eligible capital at the beginning of January 1, 2017; plus 4/3 of the amount of  deductions taken that have not been recaptured; less 4/3 of any negative  cumulative eligible capital balance at the beginning of January 1, 2017. The  total capital cost equals $188 (i.e., 4/3($96+$45-$0)). Subparagraph 13(37)(b)(ii) deems the capital cost of the government licence to  be $100 (i.e., the lesser of the total capital cost and the eligible capital  expenditure to acquire the licence) and subparagraph 13(37)(b)(iii) deems the  capital cost of the goodwill of the business to be $88 (i.e., $188-$100).

Undepreciated capital cost balance

ITA 13(37)( c )

Paragraph 13(37)( c ) ensures that the undepreciated capital cost of the new class in  respect of a business at the beginning of January 1, 2017 is equal to the  amount that would otherwise be the cumulative eligible capital in respect of  the business at the beginning of January 1, 2017.  Paragraph 13(37)( c ) also ensures that any negative cumulative eligible capital balance  is reflected in the calculation of the undepreciated capital cost of the new  class.

Paragraph 13(37)( c ) deems an amount to have been allowed to the taxpayer in respect  of the class under regulations made under paragraph 20(1)( a ) in computing the taxpayer’s income for taxation years ending  before January 1, 2017, equal to the amount by which the total capital cost of  the class (determined by the formula in paragraph 13(37)( a )) and the amount of any negative cumulative eligible capital  balance (determined by variable C of the formula in paragraph 13(37)( a )) exceeds the positive cumulative  eligible capital balance (determined by variable A of the formula in paragraph  13(37)( a )).

Example 3 – Undepreciated Capital Cost  Balance

Before January 1, 2017

In a taxation year ending before January  1, 2017, a taxpayer incurred an eligible capital expenditure of $100, resulting  in a cumulative eligible capital balance of $75 (i.e., 3/4 x $100) to acquire a  government licence of unlimited duration. In taxation years ending before January  1, 2017, the taxpayer deducted a total of $35 from cumulative eligible capital  under paragraph 20(1)(b), resulting in a cumulative eligible capital balance of  $40.

On January 1, 2017

The government licence and goodwill are  property included in new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income Tax  Regulations.

Paragraph 13(37)(a)  provides that the total capital cost of property of the new class at the  beginning of January 1, 2017 that is goodwill or that was eligible capital  property before January 1, 2017 is 4/3 of the amount that would be the  cumulative eligible capital at the beginning of January 1, 2017; plus 4/3 of  the amount of deductions taken that have not been recaptured; less 4/3 of any  negative cumulative eligible capital balance at the beginning of January 1,  2017. The total capital cost would equal $100 (i.e., 4/3($40+$35-$0)). As a result, the amount described by A in the definition “undepreciated capital  cost” in subsection 13(21) would be $100.

Paragraph 13(37)(c) would deem an  amount to have been allowed to the taxpayer under paragraph 20(1)(a) for  taxation years ending before January 1, 2017, equal to the amount by which  total capital cost and any negative cumulative eligible capital balance exceeds  any positive cumulative eligible capital balance. In this example, this excess equals  $60 (i.e., $100+$0-$40). This is, therefore, the amount determined by E in the  definition “undepreciated capital cost” in subsection 13(21).

As a consequence, the undepreciated  capital cost of the new class at the beginning of January 1, 2017 is $40, which  is equal to the amount that would be the CEC balance at the beginning of January  1, 2017.

Accrued gains from eligible capital property

ITA 13(37)( d )

If a taxation year of a taxpayer straddles  January 1, 2017 (i.e., it does not end at the end of 2016), paragraph 13(37)( d ) deems the taxpayer to have for that  year a capital gain (or where a taxpayer elects under subparagraph 13(37)( d )(iii), an income inclusion in respect  of a business) if the taxpayer would have had an income inclusion under  paragraph 14(1)( b ) if the taxpayer’s  taxation year had ended immediately before January 1, 2017. This paragraph is  intended to ensure that the rules applying to eligible capital property apply  to dispositions before January 1, 2017.

Subparagraph 13(37)( d )(i) provides that, for the purposes of  the formula in paragraph 13(37)( a ),  the cumulative eligible capital in respect of a business is increased by 3/2 of  the amount that would be included in income under 14(1)( b ). This subparagraph effectively reduces the negative cumulative  eligible capital balance to account for any taxable capital gain or income  inclusion under subparagraphs 13(37)( d )(ii)  or (iii).

Subparagraph 13(37)( d )(ii) provides that the taxpayer is  deemed to dispose of a capital property in respect of the business immediately  before January 1, 2017 for proceeds of disposition equal to twice the amount  that would be the income inclusion under 14(1)( b ) resulting in a taxable capital gain equal to the amount that  would be the income inclusion under 14(1)( b ).

Subparagraph 13(37)( d )(iii) allows a taxpayer to elect that subparagraph  (ii) does not apply, and instead an amount is to be included in computing the  taxpayer’s income from the business for the particular year equal to the amount  that would be the income inclusion under paragraph 14(1)( b ).

Subparagraph 13(37)( d )(iv) allows a taxpayer to elect to  defer the taxable capital gain or income inclusion under subparagraph 13(37)( d )(ii) or (iii) if, on or after January  1, 2017 and in the taxation year that includes January 1, 2017, the taxpayer  acquires a property included in the class in respect of the business or is  deemed by subsection 13(35) to acquire goodwill in respect of the business. Where  a taxpayer makes this election, the taxable capital gain (or income inclusion)  is reduced by the lesser of the amount of the taxable capital gain (or the  income inclusion) and 1/2 of the capital cost of the property or goodwill  acquired. To account for the reduction in the taxable capital gain or income  inclusion, the capital cost of the property or goodwill acquired is decreased  by twice the amount of the reduction.

Subparagraph 13(37)( d )(v) deems the capital gain under  subparagraph 13(37)( d )(ii) to be  attributable to the disposition of a qualified farm or fishing property to the extent  that the income inclusion that would have occurred under paragraph 14(1)( b ) is attributable to the disposition of  a qualified farm or fishing property.

Example – Deemed Gain - Taxation year  not ending immediately before January 1, 2017

Before January 1, 2017

In a taxation year ending before January  1, 2017, a taxpayer incurred an eligible capital expenditure of $100, resulting  in a cumulative eligible capital balance of $75 (i.e., 3/4 x $100) to acquire a  government licence of unlimited duration. In taxation years ending before January  1, 2017, the taxpayer deducted a total of $35 from cumulative eligible capital  under paragraph 20(1)(b), resulting in a cumulative eligible capital balance of  $40.

The taxation year of the taxpayer that  includes December 31, 2016 does not end on that day, and the taxpayer disposes  of the government licence in that taxation year and before January 1, 2017 for  $300.

Variable E of the definition cumulative  eligible capital in former subsection 14(1) reduces the cumulative eligible  capital of taxpayer by 3/4 of the proceeds of disposition, which equals $225 (i.e.,  3/4 x $300).  This results in a negative cumulative  eligible capital balance of -$185 (i.e., $40-$225).

Immediately before January 1, 2017

Subparagraph  13(37)(d)(ii) deems the taxpayer to have a capital gain immediately before January  1, 2017 equal to the amount that would be included in income under 14(1)(b) if  the taxation year ended immediately before January 1, 2017 (unless the taxpayer  elects under subparagraph 13(37)(e)(iii) to have an income inclusion from  business rather than a capital gain). The taxpayer therefore has a deemed  capital gain equal to 4/3 of the amount by which the negative cumulative  eligible capital balance exceeds the amount of deductions for depreciation that  have been taken and not recaptured.  This  capital gain is $200 (i.e., 4/3($185-$35)).

On January 1,  2017

The government licence is not included in new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Regulations, since it was  disposed of before January 1, 2017.

Subparagraph  13(37)(a) provides that the total capital cost of property of the class at the  beginning of January 1, 2017 that was eligible capital property before January  1, 2017 is 4/3 of the amount that would be the cumulative eligible capital at  the beginning of January 1, 2017; plus 4/3 of the amount of deductions taken  that have not been recaptured; less 4/3 of any negative CEC balance. The total  capital cost in this example is therefore nil (i.e., 4/3($0+$35-$35)). As a result, the amount described by A in the definition “undepreciated capital  cost” in subsection 13(21) is nil and subparagraph  13(37)(b)(iii) deems the capital cost of the goodwill of the business to be  nil.

Paragraph 13(37)(c) deems an amount to  have been allowed to the taxpayer under paragraph 20(1)(a) for taxation years  ending before January 1, 2017, equal to the amount by which total capital cost  and any negative cumulative eligible capital balance at the beginning of January  1, 2017 exceeds any positive cumulative eligible capital balance at the  beginning of January 1, 2017. This amount equals $35 (i.e., $0+$35-$0). As a  result, the amount determined by E in the definition “undepreciated capital  cost” in subsection 13(21) would be $35.

As a consequence, the undepreciated  capital cost of the new class is negative, negative $35, at the beginning of January  1, 2017, which is equal to the amount that would be the negative cumulative  eligible capital balance on January 1, 2017.

The negative  undepreciated capital cost balance is included in income as recaptured capital  cost allowance under subsection 13(1) at the end of the taxation year unless  the undepreciated capital cost balance of the class is increased before the end  of the year (e.g., by the acquisition of another property of the class).

Reduced recapture

ITA 13(38)

Consequential on the repeal of the ECP  rules and the creation of new Class 14.1 of depreciable property, expenditures  that would previously increase the cumulative eligible capital of a taxpayer in  respect of a business at a 75% rate will, subject to subsection 13(39), now increase  the undepreciated capital cost of the new class at a 100% rate.  Receipts that would previously reduce the  cumulative eligible capital of a taxpayer in respect of a business at a 75% rate  will, subject to subsection 13(38), now reduce the undepreciated capital cost fully  included in income.

Subsection 13(38) increases the  undepreciated capital cost of new Class 14.1 to the extent necessary to prevent  excess recapture when a taxpayer disposes of certain property included in the  class. Subsection 13(38) is intended to ensure that a receipt from the  disposition of property the cost of which was included in cumulative eligible  capital or undepreciated capital cost at a 75% rate does not reduce the  undepreciated capital cost at a 100% rate.

To increase the undepreciated capital  cost of the class, subsection 13(38) deems a taxpayer to have acquired a depreciable  property of the class with a capital cost equal to the least of three amounts:  the first two of these are 1/4 of the proceeds of disposition of the property that  is disposed of and 1/4 of the capital cost of that property. The third amount  is determined under paragraphs 13(38)( a )  to ( e ).

Paragraphs 13(38)( a ) to ( d ) describe four  types of property. Paragraph 13(38)( e )  is “nil”, and applies if the property disposed of is not described in any of  paragraphs 13(38)( a ) to ( d ). In effect, if the property disposed  of is not described in any of paragraphs 13(38)( a ) to ( d ), then  subsection 13(38) does not apply to decrease the reduction (by the proceeds of  disposition) of the undepreciated capital cost of the class.

Subsection 13(38) also does not apply  if one of the following rollover provisions applies in respect of the  disposition: subsection 24(2), 70(5.1), 73(3.1), 85(1), 88(1), 93(3) or (5),  107(2) or 107.4(3).

Paragraph 13(38)( a ), which applies to property (other than goodwill) that is  acquired before January 1, 2017, provides that the capital cost of the property  deemed to be acquired under subsection 13(38) is limited to 1/4 of the capital  cost of the property that is disposed of.

Paragraph 13(38)( b ) applies to a disposition of property if:

the  property is not goodwill,

the  property was acquired on or after January 1, 2017 by the taxpayer, and

subsection  13(39) deemed an amount to have been allowed to a person under paragraph 20(1)( a ) in respect of the taxpayer’s  acquisition of the property.

If paragraph 13(38)( b ) applies, the capital cost of the  property deemed to be acquired under subsection 13(38) is limited to the amount  that subsection 13(39) deemed to have been allowed to a person under paragraph  20(1)( a ) in respect of the taxpayer’s  acquisition of the property.

Paragraph 13(38)( c ) applies to a disposition of property if:

the  property is not goodwill,

the  property was acquired on or after January 1, 2017 by the taxpayer,

one  of the following “rollover” provisions applied in respect of the acquisition of  the property: subsection 24(2), 70(5.1), 73(3.1), 85(1), 88(1), 93(3) or (5),  107(2) or 107.4(3), and

the  property was acquired from a person or partnership that would have been deemed  under subsection 13(38) to have acquired a property if none of those rollover  subsections had applied.

If paragraph 13(38)( c ) applies, the capital cost of the  property deemed to have been acquired under subsection 13(38) is limited to the  amount of the capital cost of the property that would have been deemed under  subsection 13(38) to have been acquired by the person or partnership.

Paragraph 13(38)( d ) applies to a disposition of goodwill and applies in a manner  similar to paragraphs 13(38)( a ) to ( c ). That is, the capital cost of the  property deemed to have been acquired under subsection 13(38) is limited to the  amount by which the total of

generally,  1/4 of the deemed capital cost of goodwill as at the beginning of January 1,  2017,

the  amount, if any, deemed by subsection 13(39) to have been allowed to a person in  respect of the taxpayer’s acquisition of goodwill on or after January 1, 2017,  and

if  the taxpayer acquires goodwill on or after January 1, 2017 to which one of the  rollover provisions applies, the corresponding amount, if any, that would have  been deemed by subsection 13(38) to have been the cost of a property acquired  by a person or partnership if none of those rollover provisions had applied

exceeds

the  total of all amounts deemed under subsection 13(38) to have been a capital cost  of goodwill in respect of a previous disposition of goodwill.

The interaction of subsections 13(38)  and (39) is generally as follows:

Subsection  13(38) is a relieving measure that may reduce the rate at which proceeds of a  disposition reduce the undepreciated capital cost balance of the class, from  100% of proceeds to 75%, if a related eligible capital expenditure was made  prior to January 1, 2017.

To  put a non-arm’s length transferee in a similar position to a transferor to  which subsection 13(38) applies, subsection 13(39) may decrease the rate at  which an expenditure increases the undepreciated capital cost balance of the  class of the transferee, from 100% of the expenditure to 75%, to the extent  that subsection 13(38) applied to the transferor. However, subsection 13(38)  may provide relief to the transferee when the transferee subsequently disposes  of the property.

Subsection  13(38) does not apply if a rollover provision applies to deem the proceeds of a  transferor to be an amount. In such a case, 100% of the proceeds will be  relevant in computing the transferor’s undepreciated capital cost, but at the  same time that amount will be added to the transferee’s undepreciated capital  cost. However, subsection 13(38) may provide relief to the transferee when the  transferee subsequently disposes of the property.

Example – Disposition of former ECP after  January 1, 2017

Before January 1, 2017

In a taxation year ending before January  1, 2017, a taxpayer incurred an eligible capital expenditure of $100, resulting  in a cumulative eligible capital balance of $75 (i.e., 3/4 x $100) to acquire a  government licence of unlimited duration. In taxation years ending before January  1, 2017, the taxpayer deducted a total of $35 from cumulative eligible capital  under paragraph 20(1)(b), resulting in a cumulative eligible capital balance of  $40.

On January 1, 2017

The government licence is included in  new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations.

Paragraph 13(37)(a)  provides that the total capital cost of property of the new class on January 1,  2017 that is goodwill or that was eligible capital property before January 1,  2017 is 4/3 of the amount that would be the cumulative eligible capital at the  beginning of January 1, 2017; plus 4/3 of the amount of deductions taken that  have not been recaptured; less 4/3 of any negative cumulative eligible capital  balance at the beginning of January 1, 2017. The total capital cost in this  example equals $100 (i.e., 4/3($40+$35-$0)). As a result, the amount described by A  in the definition “undepreciated capital cost” in subsection 13(21) is $100.  Subparagraph 13(37)(b)(ii) deems the capital cost of the government licence to  be $100 and subparagraph 13(37)(b)(iii) deems the capital cost of the goodwill  of the business to be nil.

Paragraph 13(37)(c) deems an amount to  have been allowed to the taxpayer under paragraph 20(1)(a) for taxation years  ending before January 1, 2017.  This  amount equals the amount by which total capital cost and any negative cumulative  eligible capital balance exceeds any positive cumulative eligible capital balance,  or $60 (i.e., $100+$0-$40). As a result, the amount determined by E in the  definition “undepreciated capital cost” in subsection 13(21) is $60.

As a consequence, the undepreciated  capital cost of the new class at the beginning of January 1, 2017 is $40, which  is equal to the amount that would be the CEC balance at the beginning of January  1, 2017.

After January 1, 2017

If the government licence is disposed  of after January 1, 2017 for proceeds of disposition of $300, the amount by  which the proceeds of disposition of the property exceeds the capital cost of  the property results in a capital gain. In this case the taxpayer would have a  $200 capital gain ($300-$100), resulting in a taxable capital gain of $100.

The undepreciated capital cost of the  class would be reduced by the lesser of the capital cost and the proceeds of  disposition, in this case $100, which would reduce the undepreciated capital  cost from $40 to negative $60.

Since the government licence was  acquired by the taxpayer before January 1, 2017, paragraph 13(38)(a) would deem  a property to have been acquired by the taxpayer with a capital cost equal to  $25 (i.e., 1/4 of the lesser of the capital cost of the government licence and  the proceeds of disposition), resulting in an increase in the amount determined  for A in the definition “undepreciated capital cost” in subsection 13(21).

As a consequence, the undepreciated  capital cost of the new class after the disposition of the government licence  would be negative $35 (i.e., -$60+$25).

The negative  undepreciated capital cost balance will be included in income as recapture  under subsection 13(1) at the end of the taxation year, unless the  undepreciated capital cost balance of the class is increased before the end of  the year (e.g., the taxpayer increases the undepreciated capital cost by  acquiring another property of the class).

Non-arm’s length transfers

ITA 13(39)

Subsection 13(39) decreases the  undepreciated capital cost of the class in certain circumstances where a  taxpayer acquires property included in new Class 14.1. Although subsection  13(38) increases the undepreciated capital cost balance of the new class by,  generally, 25% of the proceeds of disposition of property that was ECP before January  1, 2017, new subsection 13(39) is intended to prevent taxpayers from increasing  the depreciable base of a property through the use of a non-arm’s length  transfer of depreciable property that was an eligible capital property.

Paragraph 13(39) applies to an  acquisition of property if:

a  taxpayer acquires a property included in Class 14.1,

the  acquisition of the property is part of a transaction or series of transactions  or events that includes a prior disposition of the property or a similar  property by the taxpayer or a person or partnership that does not deal at arm’s  length with the taxpayer, and

subsection  13(38) applies in respect of the prior disposition.

Where subsection 13(39) applies to an  acquisition, an amount is deemed to have been allowed to the taxpayer in  respect of the property under regulations made under paragraph 20(1)( a ) in computing the taxpayer’s income  for taxation years ending before the acquisition of the property, generally  equal to 1/4 of the capital cost of the property.  (However, this amount will not exceed the  amount, if any, deemed by subsection 13(38) to be an addition to the  undepreciated capital cost of the non-arm’s length vendor of the property.)

To prevent excess recapture when the  property is disposed of by the taxpayer, subsection 13(38)( b ) provides that where a taxpayer disposes of a property to which  subparagraph 13(39) applied, the taxpayer is deemed to have acquired a  depreciable property, at the time the taxpayer disposes of the property, equal  to the lesser of the amount deemed by subsection 13(39) to have been allowed in  respect of the acquisition of the property and 1/4 of the lesser of the proceeds  of disposition of the property and the capital cost of the property.

Example – Acquisition of former ECP  from a non-arm’s length person

After January 1, 2017

A taxpayer acquires a government  licence of unlimited duration from a non-arm’s length person at a cost of $100.  The government licence was an eligible capital property of the person and when  the person disposed of the property to the taxpayer, the person was deemed by  subsection 13(38) to have acquired a property with a cost of $25, which  increased the undepreciated capital cost balance of the person by $25.

When the taxpayer acquires the  government licence, the government licence is included in new Class 14.1 and  the amount described by A in the definition “undepreciated capital cost” in  subsection 13(21) in respect of the business of the taxpayer is increased, in  this example by $100 (the capital cost of the licence).

Subsection 13(39) applies to deem the  taxpayer to have been allowed $25 under 20(1)(a) in previous taxation years,  which reduces the taxpayer’s undepreciated capital cost by $25, to $75, as a  result of variable E of the definition “undepreciated capital cost”.

However, when the taxpayer eventually  disposes of the property, paragraph 13(38)(b) may apply to effectively increase  the undepreciated capital cost of the taxpayer.

Definitions

ITA 13(40)

Subsection 13(40) provides that, for  the purposes of subsections 13(37) to (39) and 40(13) to (16), the definitions  “cumulative eligible capital”, “eligible capital expenditure”, “eligible  capital property” and “exempt gains balance” have the same meanings that would  be assigned to those expressions if the Act read as it did immediately before January  1, 2017. This is intended to ensure that in determining the meaning of those  definitions, the Act is to be read as if the ECP rules were not repealed.

Clause 64

Eligible capital property rules

ITA 14

The eligible capital property (ECP)  rules in section 14 of the Act govern the tax treatment of certain expenditures  (certain outlays and expenses described in the definition “eligible capital  expenditure” in subsection 14(5)) and receipts (amounts described by E in the  definition “cumulative eligible capital” in subsection 14(5)) that are not  otherwise accounted for as business revenues or expenses, or under the rules  relating to capital property.

Eligible capital property includes  goodwill, customer lists and licences, franchise rights and farm quotas of  indefinite duration. The cost of eligible capital property is recognized, for  income tax purposes, in a pool system similar to the capital cost allowance (CCA)  system for depreciable property. Unlike for CCA, however, only 3/4 of the cost  is added to the pool, and only 3/4 of the proceeds of disposition of eligible  capital properties is credited against the pool. A deduction from the cumulative  eligible capital pool is allowed under paragraph 20(1)( b ) at a 7% rate on a declining balance basis. A negative balance at  the end of a taxation year results in an income inclusion for the year under  subsection 14(1), which may be comprised of a portion analogous to recaptured  CCA deductions under paragraph 14(1)( a )  and a portion analogous to a taxable capital gain under 14(1)( b ).

The ECP rules are repealed and replaced  by new Class 14.1 of depreciable property under the capital cost allowance  (CCA) regulations. As a consequence, property that was ECP is capital property  and expenditures and receipts that were accounted for under the ECP rules are  accounted for under the rules for depreciable property and capital property.

Clause  65

Deductions

ITA 20

Section 20 of the Act provides rules  relating to the deductibility of certain outlays, expenses, and other amounts  in computing a taxpayer’s income for a taxation year from business or property.

Allowance  from cumulative eligible capital

ITA 20(1)( b )

Paragraph 20(1)( b ) provides a deduction in calculating a taxpayer’s income from a  business of up to 7 per cent of the taxpayer’s cumulative eligible capital  property pool at the end of the year.

Paragraph 20(1)( a ) of the Act and Parts XI and XVII and Schedules II to VI to the Income Tax Regulations (the Regulations)  provide similar rules in respect of depreciable property. Paragraph 20(1)( a ) provides for the deduction of such  amount in respect of the capital cost to the taxpayer of property, if any, as  is allowed by regulation. As a result of the creation of new Class 14.1 of  Schedule II to the Regulations, property that was eligible capital property  under the eligible capital property rules will be depreciable property of the  new class. New subparagraph 1100(1)( a )(xii.1)  of the Regulations provides that deductions in respect of property in Class  14.1 are allowed at a 5% rate. As well, for taxation years that end before 2027,  new paragraph 1100(1)( c.1 ) generally  allows an additional 2% in respect of that portion of the undepreciated capital  cost of the class that relates to expenditures incurred before January 1, 2017.

Paragraph 20(1)( b ) of the Act is repealed, consequential on the repeal of the  eligible capital property rules.

This repeal comes into force on January  1, 2017.

New paragraph 20(1)( b ) provides rules allowing the deduction  of incorporation expenses of up to $3,000 per corporation. Incorporation  expenses in excess of $3,000 will be included in new class 14.1.

New paragraph 20(1)( b ) applies to incorporation expenses  incurred after 2016.

Clause  66

Meaning  of capital gain and capital loss

ITA 39(1)( a )(i)

Section 39 of the Act sets out the  meaning of capital gain, capital loss and business investment loss.

Subparagraph 39(1)( a )(i) provides that no capital gain arises on the disposition of  eligible capital property. This subparagraph is repealed, consequential on the  repeal of the eligible capital property rules.

For further information, see the commentary  on subsections 40(13) and (14) and new Class 14.1 of Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations .

Clause  67

Capital  gain and capital loss

ITA 40

Section 40 provides rules for  determining a taxpayer’s gain or loss from the disposition of capital property.

Class  14.1 — transitional rules

ITA 40(13) and (14)

Subsection 40(14) reduces the capital  gain of a taxpayer from the disposition of a property included in Class 14.1 in  certain circumstances. This reduction is related to the 1988 conversion of the  cumulative eligible capital pool from a 1/2 to a 3/4 inclusion rate. Variable C  of the formula in former paragraph 14(1)( b )  provided for a similar reduction.

Subsection 40(13) provides that  subsection 40(14) applies in respect of a disposition by a taxpayer of a  property included in new Class 14.1 if

the  property was an eligible capital property of the taxpayer immediately before January  1, 2017,

the  amount determined for Q in the definition “cumulative eligible capital” in former  subsection 14(5) immediately before January 1, 2017 is greater than nil,

the  amount determined for B in the definition “cumulative eligible capital” in  former subsection 14(5) immediately before January 1, 2017 is nil, and

no  amount is included in the taxpayer’s income for a taxation year because of  paragraph 13(37)( d ).

Where subsection 40(14) applies in  respect of a disposition, the taxpayer’s capital gain from the disposition is  reduced by such amount as the taxpayer claims, not exceeding 2/3 of the amount  determined for Q in the definition “cumulative eligible capital” in subsection  14(5) in respect of the business immediately before January 1, 2017. The  cumulative amount claimed under 40(14) in respect of all dispositions of a  taxpayer in respect of a business therefore cannot exceed 2/3 of the amount  determined for Q in the definition “cumulative eligible capital” in subsection  14(5) in respect of the business immediately before January 1, 2017.

Subsections 40(13) and (14) come into  force on January 1, 2017.

Example

Before  1988, a taxpayer

Incurs an eligible capital expenditure  of $100 for goodwill (resulting in CEC of $50); and

Deducts $12 from CEC (resulting in CEC  of $38).

In  1988 the CEC is increased by 50% (resulting in CEC of $57).

After  1988 the taxpayer deducts $18 (resulting in CEC of $39).

The  taxpayer disposes of the business with $300 of the proceeds of disposition  allocated to goodwill.

Current  Rules

Under  the current rules, 3/4 of the proceeds would reduce CEC (resulting in CEC of negative  $186).

At  the end of the taxation year, paragraph 14(1)(a) requires $30 (the lesser of  $186 and $30) to be included in income as recapture and paragraph 14(1)(b)  requires $100 (2/3 x ($186-$30-$6)) to be included in income.

Proposed  Rules

The  goodwill of the business would be deemed to have a capital cost of $92 (4/3  x $39+4/3 x $30) by new subsection 13(39).

The  UCC of the business would be $39 (equal to CEC). The proceeds would reduce the  UCC to negative 30 ($39-3/4($92)), resulting in an income inclusion under  subsection 13(1) of $30.

There  would also be a capital gain of $208 ($300-$92), which new subsection 40(14)  would reduce by $8, resulting in a taxable capital gain of $100.

Class  14.1 — transitional rules

ITA 40(15) and (16)

Subsection 40(16) reduces the capital  gain of a taxpayer from the disposition of a property included in Class 14.1 in  certain circumstances. This reduction is related to the 1994 elimination of the  $100,000 lifetime capital gains exemption. Variable D of the formula in former  paragraph 14(1)( b ) provided for a  similar reduction.

Subsection 40(15) provides that  subsection 40(16) applies in respect of a disposition by an individual of a  property included in new Class 14.1 if

the  property was an eligible capital property of the taxpayer immediately before January  1, 2017, and

the  individual’s exempt gains balance in respect of the business is greater than  nil for the taxation year that includes January 1, 2017.

Where subsection 40(16) applies in respect of a disposition,  the individual’s capital gain from the disposition is reduced by such amount as  the taxpayer claims, not exceeding twice the amount of the individual’s exempt  gains balance in respect of the business for the taxation year that includes January  1, 2017. The cumulative amount of reductions under 40(16) in respect of all  dispositions of an individual in respect of a business therefore cannot exceed twice  the amount of the individual’s exempt gains balance in respect of the business  for the taxation year that includes January 1, 2017. As well, the cumulative  amount of reductions is reduced by the amount determined for D in paragraph  14(1)( b ) for the purposes of  paragraph 13(37)( d ) if paragraph  13(37)( d ) applied in respect of the  business for the individual’s taxation year that includes January 1, 2017.

Subsections 40(15) and (16) come into  force on January 1, 2017.

Clause  68

Capital  gain - definitions

ITA 54

Section 54 of the Act provides  definitions for the purposes of the rules for the calculation of taxable  capital gains and allowable capital losses.

“eligible  capital property”

The definition “eligible capital  property” in section 54 is repealed, consequential on the repeal of the  eligible capital property rules and the creation of new Class 14.1 of Schedule  II to the Income Tax Regulations . The  definition “eligible capital property” in subsection 248(1) is also repealed.

This repeal comes into force on January  1, 2017.

Clause  69

Definitions

ITA 248(1)

Subsection 248(1) provides a number of  definitions that apply for the purposes of the Act.

“adjustment  time”

The definition “adjustment time” in  subsection 248(1), which relates to the eligible capital property rules, is  repealed consequential to the repeal of section 14, including the definition  “adjustment time” in subsection 14(5).

This amendment comes into force on January  1, 2017.

“cumulative  eligible capital”

The definition “cumulative eligible  capital” in subsection 248(1), which relates to the eligible capital property  rules, is repealed consequential to the repeal of section 14, including the  definition “cumulative eligible capital” in subsection 14(5).

This amendment comes into force on January  1, 2017.

“eligible  capital amount”

The definition “eligible capital  amount” in subsection 248(1), which relates to the eligible capital property  rules, is repealed consequential to the repeal of section 14, including the  definition “eligible capital amount” in subsection 14(1).

This amendment comes into force on January  1, 2017.

“eligible  capital expenditure”

The definition “eligible capital  expenditure” in subsection 248(1), which relates to the eligible capital  property rules, is repealed consequential to the repeal of section 14,  including the definition “eligible capital expenditure” in subsection 14(5).

This amendment comes into force on January  1, 2017.

“eligible  capital property”

The definition “eligible capital  property” in subsection 248(1), which relates to the eligible capital property  rules, is repealed consequential to the repeal of section 14, as well as the  definition “eligible capital property” in section 54.

This amendment comes into force on January  1, 2017.

“property”

The definition “property” in subsection  248(1) is amended to provide that the goodwill of a business is property for  the purposes of the Act.

This amendment comes into force on January  1, 2017.

Income Tax Regulations

Clause  70

ITR 1100

Capital  cost allowance

Part XI of the Income Tax Regulations (the Regulations) provides rules relating to  capital cost allowance.

Rates

ITR 1100(1)( a )(xii.1)

Subsection 1100(1) of the Regulations sets  out the rates of capital cost allowance that taxpayers may claim under  paragraph 20(1)( a ) of the Act with  respect to specified classes of depreciable property.

New subparagraph 1100(1)( a )(xii.1) provides that (subject to  subsection 1100(2), which provides the half-year rule) a taxpayer is allowed to  deduct an amount, in respect of property of new Class 14.1, not exceeding 5% of  the undepreciated capital cost to the taxpayer at the end of the taxation year  of property of the class.

An additional allowance is also  available under new paragraph 1100(1)( c.1 )  in respect of Class 14.1 property acquired before January 1, 2017.

Subparagraph 1100(1)( a )(xii.1) comes into force on January 1,  2017.

Additional  allowances – Class 14.1

ITR 1100(1)( c.1 )

New paragraph 1100(1)( c.1 ) of the Regulations provides an  additional allowance in respect of Class 14.1 property of a business acquired  before January 1, 2017. For taxation years that end before 2027, paragraph 1100(1)( c.1 ) allows a taxpayer an additional  allowance of 2% of the undepreciated capital cost (UCC) of the class at the  beginning of January 1, 2017, less the total of any amounts deducted under this  paragraph in preceding taxation years and three times any amounts added to the  UCC of the class under subsection 13(38) of the Act (which represents the  amount of reductions to the UCC as a result of amounts received to which the  relieving provision in subsection 13(38) applies – for further information, see  the commentary on subsection 13(38) of the Act).

Further, if the total of that  additional allowance and the amount deductible under subparagraph 1100(1)( a )(xii.1) is less than $500, the  additional allowance may be increased to allow $500 total capital cost  allowance for the class. However, in no case may the additional allowance for a  taxation year exceed the UCC of the class at the beginning of January 1, 2017  (net of additional allowances for preceding years), nor may the additional  allowance cause the total amount deductible under paragraph 20(1)( a ) of the Act for the year in respect of  the class to exceed the UCC balance (before taking any such deduction).

Paragraph 1100(1)( c.1 ) comes into force on January 1, 2017.

Clause  71

Capital  cost allowance – prescribed classes

ITR Schedule II

Schedule II to the Regulations lists  the properties that can be included in each capital cost allowance (CCA) class.  A portion of the capital cost of depreciable property is deductible as CCA each  year. CCA rates for each type of property, identified by their CCA  classes, are set out in section 1100 of the Regulations.

New Class 14.1 (5% CCA rate) applies to  certain intangible properties that would otherwise not be included in any other  class. The description of property in the class is based in principle on the  definition “eligible capital expenditure” in former subsection 14(5) of the Act.  This class includes goodwill and property that was eligible capital property of  the taxpayer immediately before January 1, 2017 and owned by the taxpayer at  the beginning of January 1, 2017.

The class also includes property, in  respect of a business, acquired on or after January 1, 2017, other than

property  that is tangible property or corporeal property,

property  that is not acquired for the purpose of gaining or producing income from  business,

property  in respect of which any amount is deductible (otherwise than as a result of  being included in this class) in computing the taxpayer’s income from the  business,

property  in respect of which any amount is not deductible in computing the taxpayer’s  income from business because of any provision of the Act (other than paragraph  18(1)( b )) or the Regulations,

an  interest in a trust,

an  interest in a partnership,

a  share, bond, debenture, mortgage, hypothecary claim, note, bill or other simple  property, or

an  interest in, or for civil law a right in, or a right to acquire a property  described in any of (i) to (vii).

Subsection 1101(1) of the Regulations provides  for a separate class in respect of each business of a taxpayer. This is  consistent with the application of the former eligible capital property rules,  which provided for a separate cumulative eligible capital pool for each  business of a taxpayer.

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

Consequential Amendments

Further consequential changes to the Income Tax Act and Income Tax Regulations are required to give effect to the conversion  of eligible capital property to class 14.1, including amendments to section 13,  paragraph 20(1)( hh.1 ), subsections  20(4.2) and (4.3), section 24, subsections 25(3) and 28(1), section 56.4,  subsections 69(5), 70(3.1), (5.1) and (9.8), 73(3) and (3.1) and 79(4),  sections 80 and 85, subsections 87(2) and 88(1), clauses 95(2)( d.1 )(ii)(B), ( e )(v)(A) and ( f.11 )(ii)(A),  subsections 96(3) and (8), 97(2), 98(3) and (5), 107(2) and 107.4(3), the  definition “qualified farm or fishing property” in subsection 110.6(1), subsections  111(5.2), 126(4.4), 128.1(1) and (4), 139.1(4), 139.1(18) and 142.7(13), the  definition “earned income” in subsection 146(1), subsection 149(10), the  definition “transfer pricing capital adjustment” in subsection 247(1), the  definitions “cost amount”, “former business property” and “taxable Canadian  property” in subsection 248(1), and subsections 248(39) and 261(7) of the Income Tax Act , sections 20 and 21 of  the Income Tax Application Rules and  sections 600, 808, 1219 and 2411 of the Income  Tax Regulations .

Excise Tax Act

Clause  13

Definition

ETA 123(1)

“capital  property”

Subsection 123(1) of the Excise Tax Act (the Act) defines terms used in Part IX of the Act  and in the Schedules to the Act relating to the goods and services  tax/harmonized sales tax (GST/HST).

The existing definition “capital property” for  GST/HST purposes in the Act largely parallels the definition “capital property”  in the Income Tax Act . As a result,  property of a person is capital property for GST/HST purposes if the property  is also capital property for income tax purposes or would be capital property  for income tax purposes if the person were a taxpayer under the Income Tax Act , except for property  belonging to Class 12, 14, or 44 of Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations . Since property that is currently eligible  capital property (ECP) is effectively excluded from capital property under the Income Tax Act , ECP is also currently  excluded from capital property for GST/HST purposes.

Changes to the Income  Tax Act to repeal the current ECP regime and replace it with a new capital  cost allowance class – Class 14.1 – will result in all ECP becoming capital  property under the Income Tax Act effective  January 1, 2017. As a result, without amending the definition “capital property”  for GST/HST purposes, these changes would also make ECP become capital property  for GST/HST purposes.

The definition “capital property” for GST/HST  purposes in the Act is amended to exclude property described in new Class  14.1 of Schedule II to the Income Tax  Regulations . This amendment provides for property that was ECP under the Income Tax Act immediately prior to  January 1, 2017 to remain excluded from the definition of capital property for  GST/HST purposes as of January 1, 2017.

This amendment comes into force on January 1, 2017.

Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST)  Regulations

Clause 9

Definitions

Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST) Regulations 2(1)

Existing subsection 2(1) of the Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST) Regulations (the Regulations) contains definitions of terms used in the Regulations.

“eligible capital property”

The definition “eligible capital  property” in subsection 2(1) of the Regulations is repealed. This repeal is  made as a consequence of the repeal of the eligible capital property rules  under the Income Tax Act , including  the repeal of the definition “eligible capital property” in subsection 248(1)  of that Act, and the creation of a new capital cost allowance class under that  Act (i.e., Class 14.1 in Schedule II to the Income Tax Regulations ). Under the existing GST/HST streamlined accounting  rules, “eligible capital property” and “capital assets”, as defined in  subsection 2(1), are subject to similar treatment. Accordingly, to maintain  this similar treatment subsequent to the repeal of the definition “eligible  capital property”, property that was formerly included under that definition  will now be included under the definition “capital asset”.

This amendment applies in respect of  supplies made on or after January 1, 2017.

“capital asset”

The definition “capital asset” in  subsection 2(1) of the Regulations is amended by setting out the existing  meaning of “capital asset” under new paragraph (a) of the definition and by  adding new paragraph (b). As a result of the creation of new Class 14.1 in  Schedule II of the Income Tax Regulations ,  property that was formerly included in the definition “eligible capital  property” in subsection 2(1) will become capital property within the meaning of  the Income Tax Act and therefore will  now be included under paragraph (a) of the definition “capital asset”.

New paragraph (b) includes certain  other property within the meaning of capital asset. In particular, if a supply  of property was made at any time before January 1, 2017 and the property was  considered eligible capital property at that time within the meaning of the Income Tax Act , the property would not  have been considered capital property within the meaning of that Act. As a  result, the property would not fall under paragraph (a) of the definition  “capital asset”. Accordingly, to maintain consistency under the GST/HST  streamlined accounting rules for such property that was formerly included in  the repealed definition “eligible capital property”, paragraph (b) results in  the property being included in the definition “capital asset”.

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

Basic Threshold Amount

Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST)  Regulations 2(2)

Existing subsection 2(2) of the  Regulations sets out the formula to calculate the basic threshold amount for a  reporting period of a registrant for the purposes of the Regulations. For a  registrant that is using the Quick Method of Accounting, the basic threshold  amount is relevant in determining the quick-method remittance rate of the  registrant under subsection 15(5) of the Regulations.

The descriptions of A and B in the  formula are amended to remove references to “eligible capital property” as a  consequence of the repeal of the definition “eligible capital property” in  subsection 2(1).

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

Total Threshold Amount

Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST) Regulations 2(3)

Existing subsection 2(3) of the  Regulations sets out the formulas to determine the total threshold amount for a  reporting period of a registrant for the purposes of the Regulations. The total  threshold amount is relevant in ascertaining the registrant’s eligibility under  section 16 of the Regulations to determine its net tax using the Quick Method  of Accounting.

The descriptions of A and B in the  formula in paragraph 2(3)(a) are amended to remove references to “eligible  capital property” as a consequence of the repeal of the definition “eligible  capital property” in subsection 2(1). Similarly, the descriptions of D and E in  the formula in paragraph 2(3)(b) are amended to remove references to “eligible  capital property” as a consequence of the repeal of the same definition.

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

Clause 10

Definitions

Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST) Regulations 15(1)

Existing subsection 15(1) of the  Regulations contains definitions of terms used in Part IV of the Regulations,  which relates to the Quick Method of Accounting for GST/HST.

“specified property”

The definition “specified property” in  subsection 15(1) of the Regulations is amended to remove a reference to  “eligible capital property” as a consequence of the repeal of the definition  “eligible capital property” in subsection 2(1) of the Regulations.

This amendment comes into force on January  1, 2017.

“specified supply”

Paragraph (a) of the definition  “specified supply” in subsection 15(1) of the Regulations is amended to remove  a reference to “eligible capital property” as a consequence of the repeal of  the definition “eligible capital property” in subsection 2(1) of the  Regulations.

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

Clause 11

Definitions

Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST) Regulations 19(1)

Existing subsection 19(1) of the  Regulations contains definitions of terms used in Part V of the Regulations,  which relates to the Special Quick Method of Accounting for GST/HST.

“specified property”

The definition “specified property” in  subsection 19(1) of the Regulations is repealed. This repeal is made as a  consequence of the repeal of the definition “eligible capital property” in  subsection 2(1) of the Regulations. Other than eligible capital property, the  existing meaning of specified property includes only capital assets of a  registrant. Therefore, the defined term “specified property” is no longer  needed and existing references to “specified property” in Part V of the  Regulations are replaced with references to capital assets.

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

“designated supply”

Paragraph (a) of the definition  “designated supply” in subsection 19(1) of the Regulations is amended to remove  a reference to “eligible capital property” as a consequence of the repeal of  the definition “eligible capital property” in subsection 2(1) of the  Regulations.

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

“specified supply”

Paragraphs (b) and (c) of the  definition “specified supply” in subsection 19(1) of the Regulations are  amended to replace references to “specified property” with references to  “capital assets” as a consequence of the repeal of the definition “specified  property” in subsection 19(1) of the Regulations.

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

Special Quick-Method Rate – University or Public College

Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST) Regulations 19(3)(c)(i)

The description of B in the formula in  subparagraph 19(3)(c)(i) of the Regulations is amended to replace a reference  to “specified property” with a reference to “capital assets” as a consequence  of the repeal of the definition “specified property” in subsection 19(1).

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.

Clause 12

Calculation of Net Tax

Streamlined Accounting (GST/HST) Regulations 21(1)

Existing subsection 21(1) of the  Regulations sets out the calculation that generally applies to determine the  net tax for a reporting period of a registrant if the registrant has elected to  determine its net tax using the Special Quick Method of Accounting set out  under Part V of the Regulations.

Subparagraphs (a)(ii) and (iii) of the  description of C in the first formula in subsection 21(1) are amended to  replace references to “specified property” with references to “capital assets”  as a consequence of the repeal of the definition “specified property” in  subsection 19(1) of the Regulations.

This amendment comes into force on  January 1, 2017.
